# CHAPTER 9

## BEGINNER’S MIND

I first picked up On the Road while finishing my preparation for the World Under 18 Chess Championship in Szeged, Hungary, in the summer of 1994. Jack Kerouac’s vision was like electricity in my veins. His ability to draw sheer joy from the most mundane experiences opened up the world to me. I felt oppressed by the pressures of my career, but then I’d watch a leaf falling or rain pelting the Hudson River, and I’d be in ecstasies about the raw beauty. I was on fire with a fresh passion for life when I traveled to Hungary.

Over the course of the two-week tournament, I played inspired chess. Entering the final round I was tied for first place with the Russian champion, Peter Svidler. He was an immensely powerful player and is now one of the top Grandmasters in the world, but going into the game I was very confident. He must have felt that, because Svidler offered me a draw after just half an hour of play. All I had to do was shake hands to share the world title—it was unclear who would win on tie-breaks. Shake hands! But in my inimitable leave-it-on-the-field style that has won and lost me many a battle, I declined, pushed for a win, and ended up losing an absolute heartbreaker.

That night I took off across Eastern Europe to visit my girlfriend in a resort village in Slovenia. She was the women’s chess champion of her country, and was about to compete in a major tournament. A rucksack on my back, On the Road in my lap, I took trains and buses and random car rides, digging it all with a wired energy. I ended up in a little town called Ptuj, and will never forget the sight of Kiti walking toward me on a long dirt road, wearing a red sundress that moved with the breeze and seemed out of character, too soft. As she came closer, her head tilted to the side; in her beauty was something severe, distant, and a chill came over me.

Our relationship was a rocky one, and we ended up fighting for two days straight until I left, exasperated, heartbroken, working my way back around war-torn Croatia to Hungary so I could fly home. I finished On the Road in the middle of the Austrian night, sheets of rain pounding down on an old train as it groaned into the darkness, a drunk Russian snoring across the car from me, mixing with the laughs of gypsy children in the compartment next door. My emotional state was bizarre. I had just lost the World Championship and the love of my young life, and I hadn’t slept in six days, but I was more alive than ever before.

Three weeks later, I was standing on a Brazilian street corner the day before representing the U.S. in the World Under 21 Championships, and suddenly Kiti was in front of me, smiling, looking into my eyes. We laughed and our adventures continued. Such was my life.

After finishing On the Road, I began reading The Dharma Bums, Kerouac’s fantastic story centering on the Beat Generation’s relationship to Zen Buddhism. I believe this was my first real exposure to a (albeit rather eccentric) vision of Buddhist thought. I loved the hedonistic internal journeys and rebellious wisdom of Gary Snyder. I yearned to retreat into the mountains and live with the birds. Instead I went to the Shambhala Center in downtown Manhattan and studied meditation. I tried to chill myself out, sitting cross legged on the floor, focusing on my breath. I had moments of peace, but for the most part I was boiling with a hunger to leave everything behind.

That’s when I took off to live in Slovenia, and it was in my European wanderings that I found the Tao Te Ching—an ancient Chinese text of naturalist musings, believed to be written by the hermetic sage Laotse (also known as Lao Tsu) in the 6th century B.C.E. I described earlier how during these years my relationship to chess became increasingly introspective and decreasingly competitive. A large factor in this movement was my deepening connection to Taoist philosophy.

Studying the Tao Te Ching, I felt like I was unearthing everything I sensed but could not yet put into words. I yearned to “blunt my sharpness,” to temper my ambitions and make a movement away from the material.[^I](part0016.html#note7) Laotse’s focus was inward, on the underlying essence as opposed to the external manifestations. The Tao Te Ching’s wisdom centers on releasing obstructions to our natural insight, seeing false constructs for what they are and leaving them behind. This made sense to me aesthetically, as I was already involved with my study of numbers to leave numbers. My understanding of learning was about searching for the flow that lay at the heart of, and transcended, the technical. The resonance of these ideas was exciting for me, and turned out to be hugely important later in my life. But for an eighteen-year-old boy, more than anything the Tao Te Ching provided a framework to help me sort out my complicated relationship to material ambition. It helped me figure out what was important apart from what we are told is important.

When I returned to America after my time in Europe, I wanted to learn more about the ideas of ancient China. In October 1998, I walked into William C. C. Chen’s Tai Chi Chuan studio on the recommendation of a family friend. Tai Chi is the meditative and martial embodiment of Taoist philosophy, and William C. C. Chen is one of its greatest living masters. The combination was irresistible.

*  *  *

I think what initially struck me that fall evening, when I watched my first Tai Chi class, was that the goal was not winning, but, simply, being. Each of the twelve people on the dojo floor seemed to be listening to some quiet, internal muse. The group moved together, slowly gliding through what looked like an earthy dance. The teacher, William C. C. Chen, flowed in front of the students, leading the meditation. He was sixty-four years old but in the moment he could have passed for anywhere between forty and eighty, one of those ageless beings who puts out the energy of an ancient gorilla. He moved dreamily, as if he were in a thick cloud. Watching Chen, I had the impression that every fiber of his body was pulsing with some strange electrical connection. His hand pushed through empty space like it was feeling and drawing from the subtlest ripples in the air; profound, precise, nothing extra. His grace was simplicity itself. I sat entranced. I had to learn more.

The next day I went back to the school to take my first class. I remember that as I stepped onto the floor, my skin prickled with excitement. Everyone was warming up, swaying around with their fists slapping into their lower backs in what I would later learn was a Qigong exercise. I tried to follow but my shoulders felt tight. Then Chen walked onto the floor and the room was silent. He smiled gently as he found his place in front of the class. Then he slowly closed his eyes while exhaling deeply, his mind moving inward, everything settling into stillness, his whole body becoming molten and live. I was rapt. From the stillness, his palms floated up, the simplest movement was profound from this man, and he began to lead us through the opening postures of the Tai Chi form. I followed along as best I could. All the profundity I was struck by in Chen’s form combined with a sense of total befuddlement. His grace was a world away. I felt stiff and awkward.

After ten minutes Chen broke the class into groups and I was put with a senior student who patiently described the basic principles of Tai Chi’s body mechanics. As we repeated the first few movements over and over, I was told to release my hip joints, breathe into the lower abdomen, relax my shoulders and back. Relax, relax, relax. I never knew I was so tense! After years of hunching over a chessboard, my posture needed serious attention. The man explained that my head should float as though it were suspended by a string from the crown point. This felt good.

Over the next few months, I learned the sixty basic movements of the meditative form. I was a beginner, a child learning to crawl, and the world began to lift off my shoulders. Chess was irrelevant on these wooden floors. There were no television cameras, no fans, no suffocating pressure. I practiced for hours every evening. Slowly but surely, the alien language began to feel natural, a part of me. My previous attempts at meditation had been tumultuous—a ball of nerves chilling itself out. Now it was as if my insides were being massaged while my mind floated happily through space. As I consciously released the tension from one part of my body at a time, I experienced a surprising sense of physical awareness. A subtle buzzing tickled my fingers. I played with that feeling, and realized that when deeply relaxed, I could focus on any part of my body and become aware of a rich well of sensation that had previously gone unnoticed. This was interesting.

From my first days at the school, my interactions with William Chen were stirring. His teaching style was understated, his body a well of information. He seemed to exist on another wavelength, tapped into a sublime reality that he shared through osmosis. He spoke softly, moved deeply, taught those who were ready to learn. Gems were afterthoughts, hidden beneath the breath, and you could pick them up or not—he hardly seemed to care. I was amazed how much of his subtle instruction went unnoticed.

A beginner class usually had anywhere from three to twenty students, depending on the day or the weather. My favorite sessions were rainy or snowy weekday nights when most people chose to stay home. Then it was just Chen and one or two die-hards, a private lesson. But more often there were ten or so beginners in the room, working out their issues, trying to smooth their movements. Master Chen would stand in front of a large mirror so he could observe the students while leading the class. He would smile and make some little quip about the current squabble between his son and daughter. He was very mortal. No fancy words. No spiritual claims. He didn’t expect the bowing and scraping usually associated with Chinese martial arts—“If I can do it, you can do it,” was his humble message.

Chen reminded me quite powerfully of Yuri Razuvaev, the Yoda-like Russian chess teacher who had encouraged me to nurture my natural voice. Chen had the same kind of insight into the student, although his wisdom was very physical. I could be doing the form in class, feel a little off, and he would look at me from across the room, tilt his head, and come over. Then he would imitate my posture precisely, point to a leg or a spot on the lower back where there was tension, and demonstrate with his body how to ease the crimp. He was always right. Chen’s ability to mimic physical structure down to the smallest detail was amazing. He read the body like a great chess player reads the board. A huge element of Tai Chi is releasing obstructions so the body and mind can flow smoothly together. If there is tension in one place, the mind stops there, and the fluidity is broken. Chen could always see where my mind was.

Over time, as we got to know each other, our interactions became increasingly subtle. He would notice a small hitch in my form like a psychological wrinkle buried deeply in my shoulder, and from across the room, in a blink, he would look into my eyes, take on my structure, make a small adjustment, and then fall back into his own body and move on with the class. I would follow and immediately feel released, as if somebody had taken a heavy knot out of my back. He might glance back to check if I had noticed, he might not. If I was ready, I would learn. It was amazing how many students would miss such rich moments because they were looking at themselves in the mirror or impatiently checking the time. It took full concentration to pick up each valuable lesson, so on many levels Tai Chi class was an exercise in awareness. While this method worked very well for me, it also weeded out students who were not committed to serious practice. I’ve seen many emerge bored from Chen’s most inspiring classes, because they wanted to be spoonfed and did not open their receptors to his subtleties.

A key movement at this stage of my Tai Chi learning experience was the coordination of breath and mind. This relationship is a critical component of Tai Chi Chuan and I think it’s important to take a moment to explain. Many Chinese martial arts masters impose a forced, old-school breathing method on their students. The idea is that a particular art has created a superior method of breath control and this method should be followed religiously. William Chen’s humble vision of this issue is that breathing should be natural. Or, more accurately, breathing should be a return to what was natural before we got stressed out by years of running around a hectic world and internalizing bad habits. I certainly had plenty of those.

In William Chen’s Tai Chi form, expansive (outward or upward) movements occur with an in-breath, so the body and mind wake up, energize into a shape. He gives the example of reaching out to shake the hand of someone you are fond of, waking up after a restful sleep, or agreeing with somebody’s idea. Usually, such positive moments are associated with an in-breath—in the Tai Chi form, we “breathe into the fingertips.” Then, with the out-breath, the body releases, de-energizes, like the last exhalation before falling asleep.

For a glimmer of this experience, hold your palms in front of you, forefingers a few inches apart, shoulders relaxed. Now breathe in while gently expanding your fingers, putting your mind on your middle fingers, forefingers, and thumbs. Your breath and mind should both softly shoot to the very tips of your fingers. This inhalation is slow, gently pulling oxygen into your dan tien (a spot believed to be the energetic center—located two and a half inches below the navel) and then moving that energy from your dan tien to your fingers. Once your inhalation is complete, gently exhale. Release your fingers, let your mind fall asleep, relax your hip joints, let everything sag into soft, quiet awareness. Once exhalation is complete, you reenergize. Try that exercise for a few minutes and see how you feel.

In my experience, when these principles of breathing merge with the movements of the Tai Chi form, practice becomes like the ebb and flow of water meeting a beach, the waves lapping against the sand (in-breath), then the water trickling back out to sea (gentle, full exhalation). The energetic wave is what most people focus on, but the subtlety of the water’s return is also deeply compelling.

It is Chen’s opinion that a large obstacle to a calm, healthy, present existence is the constant interruption of our natural breathing patterns. A thought or ringing phone or honking car interrupts an out-breath and so we stop and begin to inhale. Then we have another thought and stop before exhaling. The result is shallow breathing and deficient flushing of carbon dioxide from our systems, so our cells never have as much pure oxygen as they could. Tai Chi meditation is, among other things, a haven of unimpaired oxygenation.

Whether or not imperfect breath patterns or just plain stress was my problem, my quality of life was greatly improved during my first few months of Tai Chi practice. It was remarkable how developing the ability to be physically introspective changed my world. Aches and pains dissolved with small postural tweaks. If I was stressed out, I did Tai Chi and was calmed. Suddenly I had an internal mechanism with which to deal with external pressures.

On a deeper level, the practice had the effect of connecting disparate elements of my being. My whole life I had been an athletic guy who practiced a sport of the mind. As a boy I had been devoted to my love for chess, and my passion was so unfettered that body and soul were united in the task. Later, as I became alienated from chess, my physical instincts were working in opposition to my mental training. I felt trapped in a cerebral bubble, like a tiger in a cage. Now I was learning how to systematically put those elements of my being back together. In early 1999, Master Chen invited me to begin Push Hands practice. I had no idea that his quiet offer would change my life.

---

[I](part0016.html#note_7). Tao Te Ching, chapter 4.
