# CHAPTER 14

## THE ILLUSION OF THE MYSTICAL

Early on in my study of the philosophical foundation of Tai Chi, while scouring through a book of old adages called the Tai Chi Classics, I came upon a passage that intrigued me. In the 18th century Wang Tsung-yueh described his practice by writing:

If the opponent’s movement is quick,

then quickly respond;

if his movement is slow,

then follow slowly.

Then the 19th century sage Wu Yu-hsiang built on Tsung-yueh’s words with a typically abstract Chinese instructional conundrum:

If the opponent does not move, then I do not move.

At the opponent’s slightest move, I move first.

The first stanza is rather straightforward. It is about listening, being sensitive to the adversary’s slightest tremble, and sticking to him. Adherence is at the center of Tai Chi’s martial applicability. Basically those four lines are about becoming a shadow. But the last idea stumped me. A shadow is an effect, not a cause. How do you move before someone you are following? The precision of my chess days made me uncomfortable accepting this abstraction on faith. What was it all about?

This question was like a Zen koan to me. I spent countless hours thinking about it, trying to wrap my head around the idea and to embody it in Push Hands training. While it’s true that many of the old-school Taoist images should not be taken too literally, there is often a large kernel of experiential truth behind descriptions such as this one. I knew from chess that a superior artist could often get into the head of the opponent, mesmerize him with will or strategic mastery, using what I playfully like to call Jedi Mind Tricks. As far as I understood, the keys to these moments were penetrating insight into what makes the other tick and technical virtuosity that makes the discovery and exploitation invisible to the opponent. On the other hand, Chinese martial arts tend to focus more on energy than pattern recognition. My goal was to find a hybrid—energetic awareness, technical fluidity, and keen psychological perception. Chess meets Tai Chi Chuan.

In time, I have come to understand those words, At the opponent’s slightest move, I move first, as pertaining to intention—reading and ultimately controlling intention. The deepest form of adherence or shadowing involves a switching of roles, where the follower becomes the followed in a relationship in which time seems to twist in a tangle of minds—this is how the great Tai Chi or Aikido artist guides the opponent into a black hole, or appears to psychically impel the other to throw himself on the ground. But what is really happening? Let’s build on the last few chapters and try to break it down.

*  *  *

My experimentation with intentionality began during my early chess years. I’m a bit embarrassed to admit that as a seven-year-old boy in scholastic chess tournaments, I sometimes lured my young opponents into blundering by 1) making a move that set a trap and then 2) immediately groaning and slapping my head. This over-the-top display would usually inspire a careless moment of overconfidence followed by an eager capture of a poison pawn or some other seductive bait. Not very subtle on my part, I agree. But as with all skills, the most sophisticated techniques tend to have their foundation in the simplest of principles.

As I improved as a chess player and competitor, my opponents and I developed increasingly complex understandings of psychological tells. By the time I was ten or eleven years old, a slap on the head would have been an absurdly transparent display of trickery. But a little change in my breathing pattern might alert a rival that I had just seen something I didn’t like.

I don’t have much of a natural poker face. I’m an outgoing guy and tend to wear my heart on my sleeve. Instead of trying to change my personality, I learned how to use it to my advantage. While some chess players spend a lot of energy maintaining a stony front, I let opponents read my facial expressions as I moved through thought processes. My goal was to use my natural personality to dictate the tone of the struggle. Just how a poker player might hum a tune to put it in the head of an opponent (thereby “getting in his head”), I would control the psychology of the game by unmasking myself. If I sat up high in my chair in a natural display of confidence, my opponent might wonder if I was covering something up. Was this reverse psychology? Maybe reverse reverse psychology. Maybe reverse reverse reverse psychology? In addition to the moves I made on the board, I was posing another set of conundrums for an opponent to ponder.

Of course I was not so transparent. Mixed in with my genuine impressions would be misleading furrows of the brow, trickles of fear, or subtle flutters of excitement. Sometimes this type of deception would simply involve the timing of a sip of water or a flicker of my eyes. But not always. Against some rivals, I would be completely straightforward emotionally with no attempt at pretense. This open-book quality might continue from one tournament to the next. Over time, my barely perceptible tells were steadily reliable, and my opponent would trust what he was seeing. Gradually, my mood would become part of his evaluative process—like a leg a martial artist is conditioned to lean on before it is swept away. When the right moment or critical game was at hand, and I was faintly misleading about my current level of confidence, I could provoke an overextension or an overly cautious decision. This was a delicate dance.

At the same time, I was a careful observer of my rivals’ rhythms. As I moved into my late teenage years, many of my tournaments were closed, invitational events where ten to fourteen very strong players gathered for two-week marathons. These were psychological wars. Imagine fourteen world-class chess players living together in a small resort above a Bermuda cliff. We ate meals together, took walks on the beach, formed complicated friendships, compared notes about our approaches to the game—and every afternoon at three o’clock, we went to battle. This type of environment was a hotbed of psychological maneuvering.

It was during these years that I began to draw the parallels between people’s life tendencies and their chessic dispositions. Great players are all, by definition, very clever about what they show over the chessboard, but, in life’s more mundane moments, even the most cunning chess psychologists can reveal certain essential nuances of character. If, over dinner, a Grandmaster tastes something bitter and faintly wrinkles his nose, there might be an inkling of a tell lurking. Impatience while standing on line at the buffet might betray a problem sitting with tension. It’s amazing how much you can learn about someone when they get caught in the rain! Some will run with their hands over their heads, others will smile and take a deep breath while enjoying the wind. What does this say about one’s relationship to discomfort? The reaction to surprise? The need for control?

By the time I moved into the competitive martial arts, I was very much in tune with my tells, and was quite good at manipulating opponents’ impressions of my state of mind. I had also reached a fairly high level of reading psychological wrinkles. It was during these years that I began to cultivate methods of systematically controlling my opponents’ intention.

In chess, a huge amount of psychological observation and manipulation might ultimately manifest as a subtle hitch in an opponent’s thought process. In physical disciplines like the martial arts, getting into the opponent’s head has an immediate and often violent effect that is much more visible to the observing eye. Envision the following scene:

I’m competing against an experienced Push Hands opponent who has fifty pounds on me. He’s a good athlete, fast, strong, aggressive. The idea is to stay on your feet and within the ring. In this matchup I’m not going to win with force. It’s the mental side of the game that will be critical. The match begins with our right wrists crossed. I apply light pressure on his wrist, and he pushes back. The mood is set. As the play begins we circle one another. I probe him with feints, and each time he comes back at me with a counter attack. We go into the clinch, both of us having our right arms wrapped underneath the opponent’s left armpit, both with our right legs forward. I pulse twice with my right shoulder and each time he meets my pulse with resistance. I break out of the clinch. I’m backing up. We play a little more, at a distance. A few times I push into his midsection, and he confidently holds his ground. Then I create an opening, allowing him to close distance and pull me back into the clinch. On the entry I pulse again with my right shoulder, this time very subtly, and immediately trigger into a throw where I empty out my right side and torque him into the hole. He hits the ground hard and is confused. What happened?

This is an overstated example of mental programming. What I did here is observe and provoke a pattern of action/reaction in my opponent. He was much bigger than me, so probably entered the matchup wanting to impose his power. I began by barely pressing against his wrist in the starting position. Here he could have just neutralized my pressure, let it go, but instead he held his ground, pushed back. I have engaged his ego. He is already set up. Next I went into the clinch with the big guy and pushed twice without any ambition to move him. I just wanted to more deeply inspire our rhythm of dance. He’s big, I’m small. When I push, he pushes back. If you think about what this means, in that second in which he is responding to my shoulder probe with counterforce, I am supporting some of his weight. I’m becoming one of his legs. When I backed out of the clinch that first time, he felt very good—he’s gaining ground, I’m unhappy—so he thinks. I continue to inspire his push-back mentality for a few more moments and then I return to the clinch. This time, my shoulder pulse is very subtle. He does not have to make a decision to push back, it just happens reflexively, but now immediately after my pulse, and actually just before his response begins, I trigger into a throw that is entirely based on his approaching, programmed reaction. I empty out my right side, which has the effect of removing the leg he is just starting to lean on, and I add to his sliver of momentum with a condensed, potent technique. He hits the floor in a blur. Whenever these types of moments happen in the martial arts, it feels a little magical. He experiences standing and then falling into a black hole because our final exchange was all very subtle and perhaps invisible to his conscious mind.

In actual martial play, these types of exchanges are much more refined. Imagine the condensing process of Making Smaller Circles applied to the observation and programming side of this interaction. What can really happen is that our wrists meet and I apply the tiniest amount of pressure conceivable. My opponent holds his ground without his conscious mind even realizing that he has responded. He is already set up to be thrown with a one-two combination because his reaction to the one is already predictable. I will move before his two. Taking this one step further, if my first movement is condensed enough, it will hardly manifest physically at all. My two appears to be a one. At the opponent’s slightest move, I move first.

*  *  *

Consider one of the more interesting and psychologically subtle card tricks performed by highly evolved illusionists. A magician is onstage and asks an audience member to join him. When the volunteer (a genuinely unplanted middle-aged man who seems to be enjoying the show) approaches, the performer holds his attention for a few moments while he handles the cards. Then the illusionist lays the fifty-two cards (a real deck) on a table and asks the man to think about a card. Visualize it. The magician then shuffles the cards, lays the deck on the table, and asks the volunteer to flip the top card. It is the envisioned card. What happened here? Did the magician really read the man’s mind and then miraculously separate that card from the other fifty-one? Of course not.

This particular illusion is very much in line with the controlling of intention that a martial artist might employ. The key is the subtle manipulation of the volunteer’s conscious and unconscious minds. It all happens before the “magic” begins. As the two men stand before one another, in conversation, the illusionist engages the volunteer. This interaction is dictated by the magician. The volunteer is answering questions, following, trying to look good onstage. In the midst of all this, and in a blur that no one in the audience notices, the illusionist flashes a card. This is the sleight of hand. The critical point is that the volunteer must unconsciously notice the card without the observation registering in his conscious mind. He is engaged in the banter of the illusionist, and then suddenly has a seed planted in his mind. When asked to envision a card, that choice has already been made for him. Manipulating the card throughout the shuffle so it remains at the top of the deck is child’s play for a halfway-decent sleight of hand artist. The subtlety of this deception is that if the performer fails to fully engage the man’s conscious mind, then the clever volunteer will realize he’s being programmed and decide to choose another card—the trick won’t work.

*  *  *

If a pattern of interaction is recognizable to the adversary, then mental conditioning will not be terribly effective. In the Push Hands scene I described above, had my opponent recognized that his ego was being manipulated, he could have thwarted my plan. My feigned unhappiness and backing up made him feel powerful, confident, so he was not on the lookout for being set up. This allowed a series of subtle conditioning exchanges, which finally erupted into a throw. If I had really shoved the guy, he surely would have recognized what I was doing. I had to operate beneath his radar.

This is where Making Smaller Circles and Slowing Down Time come into play. When working with highly skilled and mentally tough opponents, the psychological game gets increasingly subtle. The battle becomes about reading breath patterns and blinks of the eye, playing in frames the opponent is unaware of, invisible technical manipulation that slowly creates response patterns. If I understand a series of movements more deeply, in more frames, with more detail, then I can manipulate my opponent’s intention without him realizing what happened.

Here is an example of how this might be done. Stand up with your feet shoulder-width apart. Put your weight in your left leg. Now, imagine somebody is standing on your left side and pushes into your body and up through your left arm with a lot of force. How are you going to keep your balance? Well, you have to lift up your right leg, go with the momentum, and then replant your right foot a couple feet away and land—as if you jumped sideways—no problem. Now put all your weight in your right leg, again, feet shoulder-width apart. If someone were to push you from your left shoulder, you would have a much bigger problem because your right leg is stuck to the ground. A fundamental principle of maintaining balance while moving fast (for example while neutralizing a martial artist’s throw or explosive push) is that your feet should never cross. Now when you go airborne, your left foot has to make the long journey past your right if you are going to have any chance of staying up. You’ll be all crossed up and probably crash into the ground. This is a simple idea with huge implications.

Much of the Push Hands game takes place with the two players connected up top. Hands and arms are subtly probing for tension. If I push into an opponent, he will either resist my force or empty out the attacked part of his body, dodge the blow, and let the aggression pass by. In either case, there will be a subtle shift in weight. This is a critical moment. In that blur during which someone switches weight from one foot to another, the receiving leg is momentarily stuck. It cannot move. At a high level, athletes have developed very powerful throws. If someone is slightly off balance or unable to move freely with incoming force, he will not be able to catch up before he is hurtling toward the ground. If I trigger a throw toward someone’s right foot at the precise moment that his right foot is settling onto the ground, then my opponent will not be able to correct himself. His footwork will get all twisted up. This idea is far from unique to the martial arts. If a tennis player has someone leaning left and hits the ball just out of reach to the right, the opponent will appear flat footed and paralyzed. If an NFL running back, NBA ball handler, or World Cup soccer player can get the defender to put weight in the wrong place at the wrong time, then he can blow on by and leave the guy tripping over himself. In virtually every competitive physical discipline, if you are a master of reading and manipulating footwork, then you are a force to be reckoned with.

So let’s build a game around the simple principle of weight redistribution. There are two intertwined components to this process. The first is condensed technique. The second is enhanced perception. Our goal is to take advantage of the moment our opponent is switching his weight from one foot to another. There are many weaknesses or tells that may be used to approach this goal—breath patterns, physical tension, inferior technical understanding, complacency, emotion, distraction, and an array of other unconscious, predictable habits can all be homed in on or combined for the desired effect. For simplicity’s sake, let’s focus on the eyes. Specifically the blink.

First of all, most people blink without knowing it, so they probably won’t consider it a weakness that may be exploited in competition. Even for top competitors, there is not much of a sense of danger associated with the blink—it happens so quickly, everything feels safe. But it isn’t. There is a small change in awareness that accompanies the flash of eyes, and a highly skilled player can train himself to exploit it. This is where the methodology of Slowing Down Time comes into play. If, through incremental training as described earlier in the book, your unconscious understanding of your discipline of choice has become sufficiently advanced, and you have learned how to trust your physical and intuitive intelligence to handle the technical components of your moment, then your conscious mind can zoom in on very small amounts of data—in this case, the eyes. Because our minds are so complex, if you give us a small amount of material to work with, and we do it with great intensity, then we can break it down into microscopic detail. If our conscious mind is purely focused on the eyes, they will seem to take a while to blink. We see them beginning to close, closed, starting to open, and then open again. That’s all we need.

So let’s say I am doing Push Hands with a very skilled opponent. I’m in the zone, feeling his weight, his patterns of movement, his eyes. He has certain tells. Before a blink, maybe his cheek twitches. Maybe a touch of moisture forms around his pupil. Or maybe his eyes close a tiny bit, then reopen, then blink. All this is subtle, but I am tapped in. Both of our right legs are forward and we are moving around the ring. In Push Hands you need to hold your ground to stay in the ring. Sometimes you have to root off the rear leg but you don’t want to spend too much time with your weight shifted back since that gives you nowhere to go: there’s not much give in your structure. Skilled players have internalized this reality, but their training can be used against them. We are flowing. Then, on his blink, or just before it begins, I pulse into a one-two combination, left, right, into his body. My movements are very small; I don’t put much force into them. Very little seems to be happening. But my right puts him into his back leg, just barely taking the weight off his front leg. When I release the pressure from my right hand, in the middle of his blink, when his presence is slightly altered, his body instinctively settles back toward his forward leg. In that instant, I trigger into a throw which combines the fact that he is moving forward, providing momentum, and for a microsecond anchoring his forward leg to the floor. If I am good, all this can happen before he has finished blinking. He goes flying onto the ground and comes up confused.

Time and again I have used this type of strategy in competition, and afterward opponents have come over to me and implied that I did something mystical. They were standing and then on the ground, and they didn’t feel or see anything occur in-between. Of course there is nothing mystical happening, just the interplay of some interesting psychological, technical, and learning principles. I read his intention to blink and then controlled his intention by determining when he would unconsciously place his weight into his forward leg. If I did this well, my movements—the one-two combination—should barely have been visible. They served the lone purpose of manipulating weight distribution. I should point out that the specific example of using a blink is just one of many options, and it can be neutralized.

When preparing for the 2004 World Championships, my main training partner was my dear friend Daniel Caulfield. Dan is a phenomenal martial artist who placed second in the world in his weight division. He’s a fierce competitor, deeply perceptive, with a philosopher’s soul that gives his martial style a unique resonance. During our training for the Worlds, Dan and I squared off on the mat every night with the intensity of tournament opponents. It was strange going to war with each other after so many years of friendship. We knew each other’s games intimately—there were no technical secrets—so our battles were largely of the mind. In the final three months of preparation, we made the risky agreement to each be responsible for his own safety, which liberated us to play as we would in the championships. There was no holding back. If one of us was slightly off, he got annihilated and had to stew in his juices until the next session. If one of us detected a tell or weakness in the other, he went after it relentlessly until a defensive adjustment was made. We weren’t just competing in the ring, we were honing our abilities to read and mask the subtlest signs on the fly.

Dan is a brilliant guy with tremendously explosive power and razor-sharp technique. He knew even my tiniest habits. Every exhalation was dangerous. If my presence diminished for a fraction of a second, I was on the floor. The air felt electric during these sessions. We taped our training and every week I broke down the video. Depending on the day, one or both of us seemed to be operating in a different dimension. Time felt slowed down or sped up. A couple of times when Dan was really on, I blinked and by the time my eyes were open, I was in midair, flying out of the ring. This was my secret! No one had ever turned it on me before. An adjustment was called for, and I got into the habit of taking a tiny step back or pulsing into Dan on my blinks, creating a little space so he couldn’t fire in on me. A few times when I was really flowing, I used Dan’s awareness of my eye patterns against him, blinking to pull him into an overextension. He quickly caught on to my ruse and our psychology continued to evolve. If both players are aware of a tell, then it will be neutralized, made ineffective, and others will have to be unearthed and exploited. The game goes on.

This type of psychological warfare is at the center of nearly all high-level competitive disciplines—and I mean competitive in the loosest sense imaginable. For example, the car salesman and potential buyer are opponents. When two highly trained minds square off, in any field, the players are in a fight to enter each other’s heads. These exchanges feel like epic tennis rallies in which the tilt of battle sways back and forth as one player picks up on a faint tell that may or may not exist long enough to be exploited, and the other has to feel the danger, and swat the rival out of his mind before it is too late.

While refined mental competitors can have extended dialogues of this nature, in my observation most people are relatively unaware of their psychological subtleties. This makes for easy pickings for the astute rival. So beware when squaring off with a well-versed negotiator, salesman, or lawyer! Understand that the battle stretches well beyond the traditional arena. When one player is more aware of these issues than the other, conditioning is quite simple. Quarterbacks flick their eyes and send safeties flying all over the football field. Real estate moguls furrow their brows, act impatient, check their watches to lull buyers into nervous offers. A chess player observes a rhythm, then sits, lets his clock tick even though a decision has already been reached, then finally makes his move just as the opponent predictably gets up to go to the bathroom. What now? Take a minute, go to the bathroom, come back. Control the pace of the game. Awareness of these dynamics can make you hard to manipulate, and can allow you to turn the tables on even the savviest of conditioners.

To master these psychological battles, it is essential to understand their technical foundation. Contrary to the ego-enforcing descriptions of some “kung fu masters,” there is nothing mystical about controlling intention or entering the mind of the opponent. These are skills to be cultivated like any other, and the last few chapters have been my attempt to lay out the road map to their internalization.
