# CHAPTER 19

## BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER

Learners and performers come in all shapes and sizes. Some people are aggressive, others are cautious. Some of us like questions, others prefer answers. Some bubble with confidence, always hungering for a challenge, while others break into a sweat at the notion of taking on something new. Most of us are a complicated mix of greys. We have areas of stability and others in which we are wobbly. In my experience the greatest of artists and competitors are masters of navigating their own psychologies, playing on their strengths, controlling the tone of battle so that it fits with their personalities. While in this book I have conveyed my vision of a life of learning, it is my hope that you will take these ideas and make them your own. Make them fit with your natural disposition. I have found that in the intricate endeavors of competition, learning, and performance, there is more than one solution to virtually every meaningful problem. We are unique individuals who should put our own flair into everything we do.

The question is: How do we do this? Let’s say we have become very good at something, and we are capable of performing reliably under pressure. How do we become exceptional? How do we make that leap from technical virtuosity to unique creativity? The real art in learning takes place as we move beyond proficiency, when our work becomes an expression of our essence. This was the challenge at the center of my preparation for the 2004 Chung Hwa Cup, the World Championships of Tai Chi Chuan Push Hands. What was it inside that could take me to the top?

When I think back on the arc of my competitive Tai Chi life, Taiwan was always the reality check. It was the true measure of my growth. The skill level in U.S. Push Hands events, including our championships, doesn’t compare to such competitions in Taiwan, where Push Hands is the national sport. Mediocrity can be self-nurturing, and frankly, many U.S. Push Hands players delude themselves about their level of proficiency. The top Taiwanese fighters train for many hours a day from childhood, constantly competing in brutal regional and national tournaments. For the summer before the biannual Chung Hwa Cup, the elite schools have training camps where fighters up the intensity of their preparation, working six or eight hours a day, combining intense conditioning with technical sharpening. The stakes are very high for these competitors, and they are well-oiled machines when they step in the ring. Foreigners traveling to the Chung Hwa Cup are entering the den of the lion. Win in Taiwan and then we can talk about greatness.

The first time I traveled to Taiwan, in 2000, I was fresh off winning my first Push Hands National Championship. In more ways than one, I had no idea what I was getting myself into. I described in Building Your Trigger how I got blindsided by the scheduling of the event. I was told my first match would be early in the morning but I was faced with hours of waiting. I got increasingly hungry and had nothing to eat. When the lunch break was announced at noon, I devoured a greasy platter and was immediately called to the ring. I got blown out of the water by the guy who went on to win the tournament. While I certainly needed to take on the psychological side of what happened to have any chance to compete under these conditions, the truth of the matter is that it was not the decisive factor. My opponent was much better than me. If I had been perfectly poised, he would have beaten me. I had a lot to learn.

In the two years following my first experience in Taiwan, I really buckled down in my training. I’ve described much of that work in the early chapters of Part II, but there was also another component to this preparation. Chinese martial arts tend to be very secretive, and Tai Chi Chuan is a particularly enigmatic discipline. If you read the Tai Chi Classics, study the philosophical foundation, practice the moving meditation, you will gain a sense of awareness, feel supple, and possibly be able to generate a lot of speed and power. But it is hard to translate these principles into viable martial application until you test yourself out in the ring and incrementally separate the real from the mythical. Unfortunately, many teachers haven’t done this themselves, and they protect their egos and their schools by claiming to have tremendous power—for example, the ability to throw someone without touching them—but they refuse to show anyone. Often, supposedly great martial artists will avoid demonstrating their “power” by offering the explanation: “If you and I were to spar, I might kill you.” Whenever I hear this I know that I am listening to a charlatan—true masters have control. On the other hand, some very powerful skills really can be developed and it is true that the greatest secrets are kept for a very select circle. There is always the lingering question—what is really possible and what is hype?

Until I went to Taiwan, I had no idea what to expect. And sure enough, the top competitors were armed with a skill set I had never dreamed of. They were remarkable athletes who had grown up in a culture that cultivated the refinement of Push Hands in the same way that the old Soviet Union had mastered the engineering of great chess players. Following that first tournament, I was armed with direct observation and many hours of video of the toughest Push Hands players in the world. That video footage of the top Taiwanese competitors would prove to be a crucial well of information.

After my first trip to Taiwan, I saw that the greatest practitioners were not mystics, but profoundly dedicated martial artists who had refined certain fundamental skills at a tremendously high level. The subtlety of their unbalancing techniques was sometimes mind-boggling. While an untrained eye might have seen nothing, these players were using incredibly potent combinations designed to provoke the tiniest of leans—and then opponents were on the floor. From 2000 to 2002, I studied these tapes in detail and slowly refined my game. During those years much of my training was with my dear friend Tom Otterness, who is William Chen’s senior student and one of the most powerful internal martial artists I have ever known. Tom is a sculptor who spends his days molding clay and who subsequently has hands and arms that feel like a bear’s—add over thirty-five years of Tai Chi training and it’s no surprise that Tom hits like an avalanche. When Tom and I first started working together, he would smash me all over the ring. I felt like a tennis ball meeting a wall of force, and to make matters worse Tom was also a heat-seeking missile—there was no avoiding his power. I was forced to add subtlety to my neutralizations and to build up my root[^I](part0027.html#note11) so I could survive his onslaughts. Working with Tom night after night gave me the confidence that I could stand in the ring with anyone.

When I went back to the Chung Hwa Cup in late November 2002, I was ready, or so I thought. By now I had won the U.S. Nationals for three straight years. I regularly competed in multiple weight categories, often giving up over a hundred pounds to my opponents and consistently winning heavyweight and super-heavyweight titles. I was a much improved martial artist and I also knew what I was getting myself into. My first match of that 2002 Chung Hwa Cup was against the Austrian representative, who had just won the European Championship a few months before the Worlds. I described in the previous chapter how early in the match he nailed me with an upper cut to the groin. He was a dirty player who counted on getting into his opponents’ heads, but a large part of my training the previous couple of years had been focused on handling his ilk. I buckled down and knocked him out of the tournament.

My next match was against the top student of one of the Taiwanese schools. He was slippery, very fast, but he had a bad habit of rooting off his rear leg when pressured. As I mentioned in The Illusion of the Mystical, the problem with putting your weight too far back is that when it shifts forward, as it must inevitably, there is an opening—a flash when you are vulnerable. I had been working very hard on my throws for the previous two years, and I was able to work him toward the edge of the ring, make him lean on me, and then use his momentum to put him on the ground. His habitual weight distribution served as a tell and I was all over him. I won the match easily.

Now came the semifinals and my opponent was a Taiwanese star. His name was Chen Ze-Cheng and he was the guy I had been most impressed with two years before. In fact, the video footage I had focused on most closely while preparing for this year’s tournament was of Chen Ze-Cheng dismantling his opponents. Chen has the physicality of a gazelle. Tall, sinewy, incredibly strong for his weight, and dazzlingly athletic, he puts opponents on the floor with a speed and technical virtuosity that just baffles the mind. He is the son of the top Push Hands teacher in Taiwan, who is also arguably the best trainer in the world, and so in addition to his physical gifts Chen had been receiving the very best instruction since childhood.

When the opening bell rang, I was all charged up. Our wrists met in the middle of the ring and he immediately shot in for a throw, which I crimped. But he kept the pressure on, pummeling in with his hands to get an advantageous grappling position. I felt danger everywhere. I kept on brushing him away from me, staving off throw after throw, but he wouldn’t stop coming. His power felt internal, relaxed, molten, and always primed for an explosion. He was all over me, relentless—but he still hadn’t scored any points. A little over halfway through the first round I caught him off-balance in the middle of one of his attacks and exploded into a huge push that sent him flying. It looked like Chen was going out of the ring, but he landed with his toes still in, heels hovering over the line, and he did a matrix maneuver, head backwards nearly to the floor while he pushed out with his waist to keep his balance and stay in bounds. Such an athlete! I charged into the attack but just when I arrived he was upright again and somehow rooted. This was a war.

Playing in that ring with Chen I had the feeling that he was in my skin, sucking out my energy. I kept on pushing him away like a bad dream. I would unbalance him a little, weather his storms, but his conditioning was amazing and he kept coming back. With about thirty seconds to go in the round, I started to feel drained. I have come to understand that this is a big part of Chen’s strategy—he pressures opponents, nags them. He is looking for openings but really just goading rivals into exhausting themselves by pushing him away. He keeps pummeling in, getting pushed back, and returning with an endless persistence. I felt this happening and decided to stay in the clinch for a minute, let him in, see if he could do anything. I was on the floor before I could blink.

It was a stunning throw. I was up and then I was down, and I didn’t know what hit me. I got up shaking my head and came back at him. There wasn’t much time left, and I was overaggressive and got taken down again. The second round was more of the same. He pressured me, I staved him off, searched for openings, but for the most part he felt like a martial giant. About a minute into the round, he caught me flat-footed and the next thing I knew I was piling face first into the mats. Man was he fast! Then he just held me off, protecting his lead. I went after him and was in the middle of a wild attack, a desperate attempt to come back when the bell rang and the match was over. We hugged. He had beaten me with grace and true excellence. My neck and shoulder were throbbing in pain. I was wrecked. I had one more match in the tournament—a fight for third place, which I somehow managed to win despite hardly being able to move the right side of my upper body. So I took bronze in the tournament and had two more years to stew in my juices until my next chance. The bar had been set.

After the 2002 World Championships I was a man on a mission. The time had come to take my game to a new level. I had felt up close and personal what the best in the world was all about and I knew it was within reach. This next phase of my learning process would be about building and refining a competitive repertoire that was uniquely my own. Immediately after coming home to New York City, my work began.

The first couple months of training after the Worlds were mostly mental. For one thing, I had to let my body heal. My shoulder was a mess and it needed some time before it could take full-tilt impact. So I studied tapes, broke down the technical repertoires of Chen Ze-Cheng and the other top Taiwanese players. Watching hours of footage frame by frame I picked up on infinitely subtle setups and plays with footwork that really opened my eyes to what I was up against. The difference between numbers 3 and 1 is mountainous. I would have to become a whole other kind of athlete. Step by step.

By mid January I was back on the mats doing soft training that didn’t aggravate the injury but kept my body fluid. I worked on some new technical ideas, integrated the movements into my arsenal by doing slow-motion repetitions. By March I could mix it up at full speed without worrying about my shoulder, but I still wasn’t playing competitively so much as working on the ideas I described in the chapters Making Smaller Circles, Slowing Down Time, and The Illusion of the Mystical. I was still in the “research and development” stage.

I have talked about style, personal taste, being true to your natural disposition. This theme is critical at all stages of the learning process. If you think about the high-end learning principles that I have discussed in this book, they all spring out of the deep, creative plunge into an initially small pool of information. In the early chapters, I described the importance of a chess player laying a solid foundation by studying positions of reduced complexity (endgame before opening). Then we apply the internalized principles to increasingly complex scenarios. In Making Smaller Circles we take a single technique or idea and practice it until we feel its essence. Then we gradually condense the movements while maintaining their power, until we are left with an extremely potent and nearly invisible arsenal. In Slowing Down Time, we again focus on a select group of techniques and internalize them until the mind perceives them in tremendous detail. After training in this manner, we can see more frames in an equal amount of time, so things feel slowed down. In The Illusion of the Mystical, we use our cultivation of the last two principles to control the intention of the opponent—and again, we do this by zooming in on very small details to which others are completely oblivious.

The beautiful thing about this approach to learning is that once we have felt the profound refinement of a skill, no matter how small it may be, we can then use that feeling as a beacon of quality as we expand our focus onto more and more material. Once you know what good feels like, you can zero in on it, search it out regardless of the pursuit. On a large scale, this is how I translated my understanding of chess to the martial arts. On a smaller, more focused scale, this is how I trained for the 2004 World Championships.

While this principle of penetrating the macro through the micro is a critical idea in the developmental process, it is also an absolutely pivotal foundation for a great competitor. At the highest levels of any kind of competitive discipline, everyone is great. At this point the decisive factor is rarely who knows more, but who dictates the tone of the battle. For this reason, almost without exception, champions are specialists whose styles emerge from profound awareness of their unique strengths, and who are exceedingly skilled at guiding the battle in that direction.

With this in mind, my training for the 2004 World Championships would have to be built around my core strengths. Sure, I am a good athlete, but frankly there would be many fighters in Taiwan who were more gifted than me physically. Some would be stronger, some would be faster, some would have more endurance. But there would be no other fighter who could keep up with me strategically. To win in the Chung Hwa Cup, I would have to bring water to their fire. I wouldn’t be successful making the fights a test of speed and acrobatics. I would have to read opponents and shut them down, confront them with strategies and refinements they couldn’t imagine. To have any chance in the ring with him, I would have to dictate the tone of battle and make Chen Ze-Cheng play chess with me.

I had one good thing going for me. As I described in the end of Part II, my main training partner in my preparations for the tournament was my friend Dan Caulfield. Dan is an incredible natural athlete and a lifetime martial artist. Since childhood, a huge part of Dan’s life has been devoted to exploring the outer reaches of his physical potential. As a boy growing up in rural New Hampshire, he taught himself to jump from higher and higher surfaces until he could comfortably leap off a thirty-foot roof, land in a roll, and come up running. If you point to a car, if he is in the mood, Dan will jump over it. If you look at a steep cliff or a brick wall, Dan can figure out how to climb it. If you go hiking with Dan, he leaps from boulder to boulder up the mountain like a goat. Add in over fifteen years of Aikido and Tai Chi Chuan training, and you’ve got yourself a force to be reckoned with.

The lucky thing for me was that Dan is built somewhat like Chen Ze-Cheng, he shares Chen’s enormous physical talent, and stylistically they are both predators. While both are technically masterful, they also have the tendency to take big risks, believing in their athleticism to help them recover if put into a bad position. This is what I had to build on. To win in Taiwan, I would have to use Chen’s greatness against him.

In the two years before the 2004 Taiwan tournament, Dan and I basically lived on the mats together. Some nights we were drilling techniques, building the power of our throws while the other was just a body, hitting the ground a hundred times before switching roles. In other sessions we were refining footwork, breaking down the precise components of going with momentum when someone has an edge and tries to spin you to the floor or out of the ring. It’s amazing how you can land on your feet and balanced if you know how to stay calm and principled, embrace the chaos, while you are spun with a torque that sends sweat hitting walls ten feet away. But more often than not Dan and I were duking it out. Night after night we had brutal sessions, spending hours in the ring, squaring off, clashing, neutralizing attacks, exploding onto weaknesses, hitting the ground, getting back up, and colliding again like rams.

Dan and I continuously pushed each other to improve. We were both working so hard that if one of us stopped learning, he would get killed in the ring. It was during the last four months of our preparation that I came upon my fundamental strategy for the tournament—what chess players call prophylaxis. You see, I believe that Dan, like Chen Ze-Cheng, is a more gifted athlete than me. For all my training, he can do things that boggle my mind. So when working with Dan I developed a game that was based on squelching his talents. In Taiwan I would play in the style of Karpov or Petrosian, the Grandmasters who triggered my existential crisis at the end of my chess career.

In the last months of Taiwan training, instead of trying to blow Dan out of the ring, I tried to shut him down, crimp his game, and use the tiniest overextensions to my advantage. I created an approach we called the Anaconda. I would pressure my opponent, stifle his attacks, slowly inch him out of the ring while cutting off escape paths. If my opponent breathed, I would take space when he exhaled. This was a game that relied on keen presence and sensitivity to my opponent’s intention. Every aggressive move in a martial arts confrontation is risky. To attempt a throw, you weaken your structure if only for a flash. I would use that flash. Whenever Dan tried to throw me, I entered the attack, took space, and tried to simultaneously neutralize his aggression and cinch down the pressure.

Week after week, I got better at this. I was creating the anti-Chen Ze-Cheng game. And Dan got better at attacking me. Some nights I would dominate him, repress his every attack, and then explode in my own throws when he got desperate. Other nights he would be electric and destroy me. I remember one night in particular when he felt like a jaguar. He was all over me, above me, behind me, on fire with an animal inspiration. I limped home feeling absolutely bereft, but the next night I came in and locked him down.

For the final three months before Taiwan, I recorded all of Dan’s and my training sessions. Then, every night I would go home and study the tapes. This was valuable on a number of mundane levels. Watching yourself on video, you can spot tells or bad habits. You can refine your techniques by breaking down what works and what doesn’t. But the primary function the tapes had for me was very different.

Dan and I had both reached such a high level of presence to incoming aggression that our sessions were marked by fewer and fewer points. We knew each other’s games, we knew what attacks were coming, we knew how to probe without overextending. Dan had figured out how to play against my right shoulder in a manner that neutralized most of my aggressive impulses, and I could usually take advantage of his attacks to edge him out of the ring. If you took our physical and mental abilities, put them together, and collided them on the mats, we were dead even. We were also performing at peak levels, so few mistakes were being made. We were in a state of dynamic equilibrium. The only times points were scored were in moments of creative inspiration, when one of us did something that transcended our current level of ability. These were the moments I focused on in the videos.

Two or three times in an evening, Dan and I would be in the middle of a wild flurry and suddenly my body would put his body on the ground. Just like that. And two or three times, he would do the same to me. We were playing with such a tight margin, that I couldn’t think about a technique and then do it to him. No way it would catch him off-guard. But a few times my instincts would find something that my conscious mind didn’t pick up on.

When I went home and watched the video, I studied each of these moments frame by frame to see what happened. Sometimes I would see myself triggering into a throw just as Dan’s blink began. Other times, my body would direct a throw off to a creative new angle that caught Dan unawares. Maybe my footwork would fall into rhythm with his in a manner that opened up a tiny gap of momentum to ride, or I might catch him at the beginning of an exhalation. There were many moments like this, each of which I studied until I understood. The next day I would come into training and tell Dan what I discovered. We would then convert what had been creative inspiration into something we understood technically. If my body synched up with his breathing, we broke down how to do this at will. If I caught a blink, we studied the nuances of blinking. Next time we sparred, Dan would be aware of the new weapon I was working with, and so he would create a counter in order to stay in the game. Then I would work against his counter. This way we raised the baseline of our everyday level, and incrementally expanded the horizon of what our creative bursts could attain.

Let’s think about this method in the language of chess: If a chess expert were to have his most inspired day he would come up with ideas that would blow his mind and the minds of others at his level. But for the master, these inspired creations would be humdrum. They are the everyday because his knowledge of chess allows him to play this way all the time. While the weaker player might say, “I just had a feeling,” the stronger player would shrug and explain the principles behind the inspired move. This is why Grandmasters can play speed chess games that weaker masters wouldn’t understand in hundreds of hours of study: they have internalized such esoteric patterns and principles that breathtakingly precise decisions are made intuitively. The technical afterthoughts of a truly great one can appear to be divine inspiration to the lesser artist.

When I think about creativity, it is always in relation to a foundation. We have our knowledge. It becomes deeply internalized until we can access it without thinking about it. Then we have a leap that uses what we know to go one or two steps further. We make a discovery. Most people stop here and hope that they will become inspired and reach that state of “divine insight” again. In my mind, this is a missed opportunity. Imagine that you are building a pyramid of knowledge. Every level is constructed of technical information and principles that explain that information and condense it into chunks (as I explained in the chapter Slowing Down Time). Once you have internalized enough information to complete one level of the pyramid, you move on to the next. Say you are ten or twelve levels in. Then you have a creative burst like the ones Dan and I had in the ring. In that moment, it is as if you are seeing something that is suspended in the sky just above the top of your pyramid. There is a connection between that discovery and what you know—or else you wouldn’t have discovered it—and you can find that connection if you try. The next step is to figure out the technical components of your creation. Figure out what makes the “magic” tick.

The way this process functioned with Dan and me was that my body would somehow put him on the ground. The way I did it was outside both our conceptual schemes, so neither of us really knew what happened. Then I went home and studied the tape. I saw, for example, that my throw triggered from a precise grappling position at the exact moment that Dan’s left foot received his weight from his right foot. I didn’t do this consciously—my body just did it instinctively. But now we have learned that in that particular position, an opponent is vulnerable when he shifts his weight in that manner. The next step for me is to create techniques that force the switch of weight. And Dan can become more conscious to avoid the trap. We both get better and better at playing around the split second when the weight settles on the ground through the left foot. We have created a body of theory around a fleeting moment of inspiration. Now there are techniques and principles that make this weapon accessible all the time. We have taken our pyramid of knowledge up one level and solidified a higher foundation for new leaps.

After seven or eight weeks of this work, we had internalized a very tight network of martial arts techniques that were all the products of Dan’s and my most inspired moments. This became our championship arsenal. What we constructed was all new, highly personalized, and completely true to our individual strengths. And most of it was psychological. It was about getting in the opponent’s head, catching his rhythms, controlling his intention with subtle technical manipulation. When we went to Taiwan, we were ready for war.

---

[I](part0027.html#note_11). As a reminder, by “root” I am referring to the ability to hold one’s ground while directing incoming force down, into the floor. You can then channel the force back up from the ground and bounce an opponent away. When a martial artist is described as having a “deep root” the parallel is to a tree—it feels as if his or her body is extended into the earth.
