# CHAPTER 20

## TAIWAN

2004 Chung Hwa Cup Tai Chi Chuan World Championships Taipei, December 2–5, 2004

Clouds moved fast, dark and grey, the rain coming in gusts and then tapering off as Typhoon Nanmadol surged over the South China Sea. I’ve always loved storms; now these fierce winds made me electric. It was Thursday evening, forty hours from battle, and I stood at the peak of Elephant Mountain looking down on an Old Taoist Temple, the city of Taipei spread out below. The smell of incense wafted up from the temple shrine, smoke swirling in the building winds. I’d begun preparing for this tournament, the World Championships, the day after losing in the semifinals two years before. My last three months of training had been brutal. Night after night of pain, pushing myself to the absolute limit until nothing was left, and then dragging myself home to rest up for the next day’s sessions. Now I stood, breathing deeply, soaking in the wind and rain. The sky to the west was a livid red—it was coming. I felt alive and ready.

*  *  *

There are two kinds of Push Hands in the Chung Hwa Cup. One is called Fixed Step. The other is Moving Step. Together they make up two divisions in this gigantic international competition that draws thousands of martial artists from more than fifty nations. The events are very different and most competitors specialize in either one or the other. It was my dream—in truth, it was my ambition—to win both.

The Moving Step game is fast, explosive, played in an eighteen-foot-diameter ring. The object is either to put your opponent on the ground or out of the ring. The inner game of Moving Step is subtle; it requires fine-tuned presence, technical mastery, and quickly evolving strategy. But from the outside much more apparent is the feral athleticism of the best fighters. It is a physical and mental melee of the highest order.

The Taiwan-style Fixed Step game is much more restrictive—in many ways, it is the truest test of a Tai Chi practitioner because there is no way to get around the internal principles of the art. There is no room to mask technical weakness with athleticism in Fixed Step. It is minimal, like haiku. You have two highly trained martial artists engaging in an explosive contest at very close range. There is great potential for injury because of violent clashing and sudden joint manipulation. The game is tight and the power generated is so condensed that an untrained spectator can often see nothing until one fighter suddenly goes flying away from the other and lands on his back eight or ten feet away.

Thursday night, about four hours after I got back from my blustery hike up Elephant Mountain, I found out that the tournament officials had changed the rules of the competition. Previous years in Taiwan, Fixed Step had been played on raised pedestals, each fighter standing with his right foot forward, left foot back about three feet to allow for a dynamic, rooted stance. In this year’s competition, the Taiwanese removed the pedestals without any warning to foreign teams. This apparently small alteration in format would give a crucial advantage to the local teams who had been training under the correct conditions for the previous year. I will come back to this surprise soon—but first imagine a Fixed Step competition.

The forward feet of the opponents are lined up heel to toe, about one foot apart. Players are very close together, with opposing right wrists crossed and touching, and left hands hanging by the left hips like old Western gunfighters. In this posture the mental game begins. Players stand still, poised, vying for subtle advantages that will key explosive attacks. This moment is an energetic stare-down.

Then the ref says go and play erupts. The first to move a foot loses the point, or if someone is thrown to the ground, two points. If a lead ever exceeds ten points in a round, round over. At first glance, it looks like power and speed are decisive. Whoever is faster getting his hands on the other guy seems to win. But if you break the game down it becomes apparent that certain techniques refute other techniques. Every attack will get you thrown on the floor if met by the right counter, but moves and combinations of moves come so fast it feels like a guessing game—martial rock/paper/scissors.

This is only the beginning. There is a sea of potential that flows from this opening stance, an almost infinite number of feints, swift attacks from all angles, psychological ploys. In time, with years of creative training and a willingness to invest in loss, to take blow after blow and get blasted off the pedestals as a way of life, the game starts to slow down. You see attacks coming in slow motion and play refutational maneuvers in the blink of an eye. Great players are doing many invisible things in this game. It feels like chess. At the highest level of the sport, you are living inside your opponent’s head and directing what he comes at you with.

Because each Fixed Step point begins exactly the same way, with two players assuming an identical opening posture, competitors can plan attacks in advance and over time build repertoires of combinations and defenses that they fire into when the ref sets play in motion—in the same manner that strong chess players have sophisticated opening repertoires. Since the first time I went to Taiwan four years earlier, I had been breaking down the game and creating Fixed Step theory that emerges from the agreed opening posture: standing on pedestals with the set hand positions. Taiwanese officials had sent us the exact dimensions of the pedestals months before this tournament. I had then internalized my arsenal of attacks and neutralizations, and was so comfortable with the game that I often trained with my eyes closed, allowing opponents to trigger first. My body would shrug off the attacks and explode into instinctual counters. All of this training was done while rooting on two small pedestals.

Now, one day before the competition begins, the news was that there were no pedestals and the rear hand would begin on the opponent’s elbow instead of by the hip. This is a huge structural change. The equivalent in chess would be for a Grandmaster to spend five months preparing an opening repertoire for a World Championship match and then, before game one, to discover that the whole repertoire had been disallowed by a mysterious rule change.

In a minute everything had shifted, and we had a handful of hours to re-create an entire repertoire. On one level this was infuriating; on another it was predictable. Tai Chi is an emblem of Chinese and Taiwanese greatness. In a way, this discipline represents their sporting and philosophical essence. The top Taiwanese competitors train since childhood, many hours a day. If they win this tournament, they are national heroes. They take home a substantial cash prize and also get full scholarships to university. A career can be made in a day. Foreigners are welcome, but no one wants them to win. The Taiwanese pull out the stops to prevent it. It is a question of national pride.

At 1 A.M. Thursday night Max Chen and I were up exploring the nuances of this new structure. Max is my teacher’s son and a very close friend of mine. He has been the U.S. National San Shou (Chinese kickboxing) Champion three times, and is an accomplished Push Hands player. Max knows what it’s like to be on the front lines in international competition. We made a plan. Then I lay in bed visualizing until 3 A.M.

By Friday morning it was pouring torrentially. Typhoon Nanmadol was just offshore. I’ve been through a number of hurricanes on boats in the Bahamas, and something about this type of brooding, ominous buildup in the sky clicks me into a highly efficient place. I was on fire with ideas. We had intended to rest Friday, fill up the tanks, but that wasn’t an option anymore with the new rules. The whole team, ten of us, gathered under a huge gazebo-type structure in the park by Hsinchuang Stadium, where the tournament would be held. After living and dying on the mats together for the past year, we were a family, a dedicated unit, with utter conviction about our work, and yet from one angle our situation was surely preposterous. We were gathered outside in a typhoon trying to figure out how to survive without pedestals. Max had spent the morning jogging through the downpour trying to sweat off four pounds before the weigh-in. The wind was howling and even under the gazebo, rain hit us horizontally.

Dan and I worked together refining new strategies on the fly. While our teammates did some light sparring, we spent two hours re-creating our Fixed Step theory. The key was to roll with the evolving situation and contour new tactics around the principles we had discovered back home. When hit with such surprises, if you have a solid foundation, you should be fine. Tactics come easy once principles are in the blood. I felt confident. House rules are almost always in effect when playing on the road—I knew this from the chess days and previous Taiwanese debacles. Handling dirty tricks is a part of the game.

DAY 1

Saturday morning. We arrived at the stadium and weighed in at 7:30 A.M., everybody hungry, but no eating until we made weight. After all the preparation, there is nothing like that feeling of icy reality that hits when the opening bell is near.

At the weigh station reality sunk in one step deeper when we saw Chen Ze-Cheng and his team—the dominant school in the world. He was the guy who had beaten me two years earlier and whom I had been preparing for all this time. I walked over and said hello, and Chen told me that he was competing under 75 kilos (165.3 pounds), the weight division below me. I was shocked. I had spent two years dreaming about this great fighter, strategizing against his sinuous cat-quick game; in my mind, winning the world championship had meant defeating Chen Ze-Cheng. But then he pointed toward their guy in my division and I took a deep breath. They called him Buffalo and he looked like pure power. In Taiwan he was considered unbeatable. He’d been groomed to become a world champion since he was a young boy. He was a little shorter than me and much thicker. He weighed in at 79.96 kilos (176.3 pounds). I weighed in at 78.16. He was four pounds heavier than me and probably cut fifteen pounds to make weight. The guy was a daunting physical specimen.

After the weigh-in, my team and I went and checked out the Moving Step ring. I felt the traction of the mats, then moved around a little. Immediately alarm bells were going off—the ring seemed too small. Tournament officials had sent us rules and ring dimensions months ago: a six-meter-diameter circle. We used their precise dimensions to set up our training mats for both Fixed and Moving. I had internalized the dimensions of the circle and knew exactly how it felt when my heel was a quarter inch from the edge. If you step over the border in Moving Step you lose a point, and in the flurries of action there is no time to look down—ring sense is hugely important. We measured and the diameter was fifteen inches smaller than what they had sent us. This was the second dirty trick and the matches hadn’t even begun. So we had to adjust. Typical, but there was nothing to be gained by getting worked up about it.

We walked to the hotel in the rain, ate a big meal, and came back at 10 A.M. fueled for battle. The Fixed and Moving competitions would be going on at the same time. Two rings would be used for Moving Step, three for Fixed. Weight divisions were every five kilos, with men and women competing separately. Over four thousand competitors from all over the world were milling around, and the stadium was mobbed with fans, many of them chanting euphonically in languages I didn’t understand. It was a great, lilting, hypnotic sound. Acres away, on the far side of the arena, balletic Tai Chi form competition was taking place. Blood and meditation were coexisting.

My first match would be Moving Step. The rules, simply put, are as follows: Play begins from contact—this is a grappling competition like wrestling or judo, so striking is supposedly not encouraged. The target area is from the waist to just below the neck. You cannot lock your hands behind someone’s back or grab their clothes, otherwise play is wide open. You gain one point for throwing the guy out of the ring, two points for a clean throw where the opponent hits the floor and you are standing. One point for a throw where you go down on top of the opponent. Matches are three rounds, two minutes playing time each. If someone leads by four points in a round, it is over. Two out of three rounds wins and if rounds and points are even by the end of three rounds, the lighter guy wins. That rarely happens, but if the Buffalo and I stayed healthy and managed to make it into the last round, it could give me a tiny edge.

My first Moving Step opponent was strong, fast, and aggressive. His speed surprised me—a very good athlete. All the players from the top Taiwanese schools have a way of putting the cardio load on the opponent and draining him with subtle pressure and leverage. They have excellent pummeling techniques, which means they know how to take inside position with their forward arm in the clinch. Imagine an opponent’s left foot forward, left arm deep under my armpit and wrapped around my back or up my shoulder. That is an underhook. Pummeling is the fight for that position. The inside arm tends to give more leverage and slightly better angles for throws. If a player has “double inside position” it means that he has underhooks on both sides. This is considered to be very advantageous in all grappling arts. If you ever hear martial artists talking about a “pummeling war” they don’t mean that two people are clobbering one another, but that they are fighting for underhooks.

It turns out that pummeling would be a huge component of my tournament strategy. You may recall that I hurt my right shoulder fighting Chen Ze-Cheng in the semifinals of the 2002 World Championships. Since then, the shoulder has been my Achilles heel. About three months before this year’s Taiwan tournament, the 2004 Worlds, Dan came upon an interesting method in training. Whenever I had the right side underhook in the clinch, he would clamp down on my elbow from the outside in a manner that just killed my shoulder. After weeks of pain, I decided to concede the pummeling war and take double outside position in training to avoid damaging the shoulder any further. While I initially felt at a disadvantage giving Dan the underhooks, over time I became increasingly comfortable. I came up with some subtle ways to crimp his leverage and I found that I could make the angles work for me.

In my final ten weeks of preparation, when training with anyone other than Dan, I felt completely dominant from the outside position. My weakness had blossomed into a weapon that would prove critical for me in Taiwan. You see, the Taiwanese are lightning-quick with their pummeling and I made the decision early in the tournament not to fight it—don’t play their game. By giving them that first position they were so used to fighting for, I mitigated a large part of their training: the pummeling war. Then we would do battle in the setup I had become expert in, and that they hadn’t studied as deeply. This happens all the time in chess at the highest levels; top players discover hidden resources in opening positions that had been considered theoretically weak. They become masters of a forgotten or undiscovered battleground and then guide opponents into the briar patch.

So my first opponent was very aggressive but nothing he brought felt dangerous. His pummeling was excellent and he came at me with tremendous confidence, but once I locked down on him from the outside his structure felt a little unsound, like a grand house with a flawed foundation. I knew that if I weathered his early attacks, I’d be fine. I crimped his attempts to use the underhooks and edged him out of the ring a couple of times. I went up two points in round one and just held the lead.

Then I watched the Buffalo. Wow! First he blew the other fighter out of the ring. Then, lightning-quick, he trapped both of the opponent’s arms under his left armpit, took the guy’s back, and flipped him over a deep leg. He manhandled the guy, and looked unbeatable. At one point after a throw it looked as if he would fall but he somehow did a full split, caught himself, with heel and toe, and just popped back up, getting the full two points. This was my man. I had to find a weakness but didn’t see it.

My next match was Fixed Step. Not much problem, except for the judges. Many points that I won, the scorekeeper didn’t record. This was infuriating but also hilarious. Imagine, the referee would signal that I’d won the point but the scorekeeper would neglect to write it down as if he’d forgotten or hadn’t noticed. This happened again and again. My teammates and father were screaming about it, but nothing was done except that officials would nod to them with placid smiles. It happened to every foreigner in the tournament, sometimes decisively. This was the way they kept score here. Their country. Nothing to do but score more points and keep the static out of my head. Against most guys the judges couldn’t really hurt me. But in the final rounds where we were evenly matched, there would be little margin for error. I tried not to think about it.

Whenever I had a break I watched the Buffalo. He won his points easily. He had fine technique but he was also much more powerful than his opponents. He could blast most guys right out of the ring in a flurry of explosive aggression. But I started to sense some small vulnerability. Maybe. He was technically sharp with dazzling footwork, speed, and a deeply rooted stance, but something about his structure teased me.

In my next Fixed Step match I faced off with the top guy from the school from Tainan that is the main rival to Chen Ze-Cheng’s team. They are fierce competitors, like soldiers, strong, fast, well trained, pure aggression. All signs pointed to a war, but we touched hands and I knew I had him. You can read a lot about a martial artist from the opening contact. Great ones feel mountainous, like the earth is moving inside of them. Others ring more hollow. He bounced right off me on the first couple of points. Then I started mixing things up and he couldn’t keep up with the tactics I threw at him. I won the first two rounds by a big margin, no injuries. Match over. I watched the Buffalo compete again in Fixed and he was overwhelming against a lesser opponent, but I had this building feeling that there was something a little wrong with his foundation. He was so physically gifted that it was easy to stand gaping as he tossed the guy to the floor left and right, but he seemed to be covering something up with all the flash. I wasn’t sure why or how, but in Fixed he felt mortal. In Moving Step, he seemed unstoppable.

Day one was over and I wasn’t injured. This is a long tournament, a marathon of sprints. Almost all of these martial arts competitions last only one day because players’ bodies usually break down after that. You can push through virtually anything in eight or ten hours, but then the injuries burrow in overnight and you can’t walk or lift your arms in the morning. This tournament is two days. You have to win on Saturday without getting badly hurt to have a chance to become World Champion on Sunday.

I went to bed listening to the rain outside my window, and I dreamed about the Buffalo.

DAY 2

Sunday morning, 8 A.M. We arrived at the stadium in time for an unhappy surprise. The Taiwanese officials had created a separate tournament for foreigners and scheduled to run it before the championship rounds. I was informed that participation was mandatory. I asked whether this could take place after the main event and was told that it was impossible. This absurd tournament within the tournament clearly had the function of exhausting and injuring foreigners who were still competing for medals against the Taiwanese in the Championship. A time-consuming protest ensued with a tremendous language barrier eventually being bridged by my teacher, who fortunately had some weight. It was agreed, finally, that those of us who were still in the main competition could take part after our final matches.

I had two fights left in each division to win. First was Moving semifinals, against the number one fighter from the tough Tainan school. Moving was his specialty and he came right at me, elbows tight in the pummeling, fast, persistent, putting the cardio load on me. He attacked early and I circled out but stepped on the line. My instincts were off—I thought I was well in bounds, but was wrong. On our mats at home I would have been in. Bad move. Down 1–0. We went back at it. I let him push me to the edge of the ring, baiting him, and exploded into a reversal that put him inches from the line, but he had a deep root and wouldn’t go out. Then I switched gears and went on the offensive, pressuring him, using the Anaconda technique I had developed three months earlier—inching him out, surging, tightening the noose whenever he tried to squirm away, clamping down when he exhaled. In the final seconds I caught him with a beautiful throw but my shoulder got jammed on the landing.

I was on my back between rounds, breathing hard. This may have had a telling psychological effect. In preparation the last few months, we did a lot of interval training, building sprint time in the ring and working on recovery. We would play one-minute rounds with one-minute breaks between, sometimes going fifteen or twenty rounds like that, four of us playing, alternating play and recovery. My idea was to be able to have a wild sprint, drain myself completely, and know I could come back in the next round even if I felt like death baked over.

Interestingly, months before the competition the organizers told us that there would be thirty seconds between rounds and we found out upon arriving in Taiwan that it was one minute. So I had been doing this one-minute interval work with the team largely as a training mechanism to work on going all-out without overextending, and also to condense recovery time. Now we showed up and there were one-minute breaks between rounds. Their switch played right into our hands. I knew I could spend every last drop if I had to, and then I would be back and okay sixty seconds later if I lay on my back breathing deeply. I looked like a dead man between rounds, but was fine.

Round two. He shot right in at the bell. I held him off, gave him the underhooks, locked down, cranked, right, left, he went with it, but then I caught him on the third try, spun him out of the ring and onto the floor. These guys are great technicians and I really figured out how to shut them down. By just giving them that first position they were so used to fighting for, I created a new battlefield. There was no resistance where they expected it and then much more where they were less prepared. Amazing how it all started with an old shoulder injury.

I was in his head and up 2–0. He looked confused. Then the confusion turned to desperation and he charged me, putting everything he had into one last attack, torquing wildly, out of control. I went with the force, landed on my feet, and used the momentum to toss him out of the ring and onto the floor. Round and match were mine.

I watched the Buffalo annihilate another opponent. Just him and me in Moving Step for the title. I still didn’t see a weakness in his game, but I had a plan. There were forty-five minutes before my Fixed Step semis and I had a rough time. My shoulder hurt so badly, I couldn’t lift my right arm up past my waist. I was all banged up, black eye, forehead one big rug burn, pain all through me. The shoulder had me concerned. Dan and I were the only guys on our team left in the main draw and we sprawled on the mats while teammates massaged our legs, shoulders, arms. I put on my hood, sat in a corner, and hoped my body could hold out for three more matches; then it didn’t matter.

They called me up for Fixed Step semis and it took a lot to walk over to the ring. My opponent was somebody I had been watching throughout the tournament—in his forties, barrel-chested, serene, and powerful, the man had the feeling of a samurai. He was older than almost all the competitors, the only guy his age still in the competition. I had watched him dispense with younger, athletic opponents left and right, and he clearly had amazing skill. What I didn’t know is that he was one of the most respected teachers in the world. The stadium was loaded with his students. I heard chanting and knew it wasn’t for me.

Round one. Our wrists connected and before the first point began he was working on me, taking space in that strange internal way some of these rare ones can. The ref said “Go!” I attacked fast, met empty space, and flew into it. Down 1–0. This guy had the stuff, the magic if there were magic in the martial arts. Next point I bounced off him. Powerful root. I couldn’t attack him. I tried a lateral technique and won a point. He blasted me once and then pulled me into a black hole. I was down 4–1. I tend to feel pretty invincible in Fixed Step, but this man understood things about Tai Chi I had not yet discovered.

The rounds in Fixed Step are thirty seconds stop time (the clock is stopped after each point). This is enough time for 15–20 fast exchanges. Not much time to figure things out. I sank deep on an attack and actually moved him backward. My point, but a referee came over and said that the point didn’t count because my opponent’s initial structure was illegal. Strange logic. Then I scored another point that they waved off. I heard my team and pop going crazy.

I had been to this tournament twice before and both times was shocked by the mendacity of the judges. This time the pattern was familiar to me. Basically, this is how it works: There is grand ceremony welcoming the foreigners, but they don’t want us to win. The way they tend to steer results is by making some horrific calls early in the match to get the momentum going in the direction of the local player. Usually when a foreign competitor starts to feel that the match is rigged he gets increasingly desperate and over-aggressive. Instead of competing with presence he becomes overwrought and caught up in a downward spiral. His game falls apart. Then, once the Taiwanese player is in control of the match, the judging becomes exceedingly fair. In fact, they become overly kind to create the illusion of fairness.

I knew all of this coming in. The key was to keep on winning points, and to immediately come back from a bad call with a huge surge. Don’t get rattled! If I controlled the momentum of the game, it would be hard for judges to take matches away. That was the plan. To be honest, I also felt a lot of love for my opponent in this match. The whole stadium was against me, except for our U.S. contingent of ten. I didn’t blame the Taiwanese for wanting their man to win.

I was down three points, and needed to come back. He won another one. I had to stop the slide now, right now, or I wouldn’t be able to catch up. I’d created a move two months earlier that I thought might be decisive in the tournament. We called it the bear hug. I would allow my opponent to come straight in on my chest with a hard attack. My two arms circled fast behind him and on the push I sank deep while pulling him down with me. I could also crank left or right with it. When applied cleanly, it is disturbing to have this done to you because it feels like you’re falling into a void and at the same time your wrist is exploding—no choice but to go down. I let him in, bear hug, put him on the floor—two points.

He was up 5–3 but hadn’t ever seen the bear hug before. I used it again, and spun him right. Down 5–4. Now the judge came over and tried to mess with my head. He told me to adjust my left-hand position on the starting posture—just psychological manipulation. I smiled at the ref and kept fighting. Bear hug again, it’s even. Now my opponent stepped off the mats and came back with a different feeling. He was beginning to understand. He changed his left arm to trap my right if I bear-hugged. He had answers and I had new variations. We were flowing now, moves coming fast like speed chess in Washington Square Park.

This Fixed Step game is a sublime experience. At first it feels fast and jolty, like a painful guessing game, but then the play slows down in your mind. Over the years, as I became more and more relaxed under this kind of fire, and as my body built up enough resistance that the blows didn’t bother me, the game became completely mental. It almost always felt as though I was seeing or feeling the action in more frames than my opponents, and so I could zoom in on the tiniest details, like the blink of an eye or the beginning of an exhalation. When our wrists connected, I usually felt exactly what my opponent would come at me with, and I learned how to apply the subtlest of pressures in order to dictate his intention. But this great Fixed Step fighter imposed his own reality. I couldn’t get in his head. Or every time I got in he kicked me back out.

I tried the bear hug again but he jammed it. He’d figured it out. My own teammates hadn’t learned how to parry the bear hug in two months of work. This guy took seconds. I was down 7–5, without much time left in the round. I faked a hard attack, but then slipped in a right underhook and threw him away. I was down one point with 1.1 seconds left. I needed to score fast and surged hard with a four-strike combination that scored at the bell. Round one was a tie, barely.

The second round is always played with the left foot forward. For some reason my opponent’s structure didn’t feel quite as solid with the legs reversed in the opening position. I began sinking deeply on my attacks, playing with feints, tight combinations, and misdirection. I noticed that if I faked in my mind, without even moving, he felt it and responded. He was incredibly sensitive to intention, so I started unbalancing him with invisible attacks that I pulsed into but didn’t actually manifest physically. I was getting in his head. He felt it and got aggressive, attacked hard, and blasted me away. But now I had him attacking, and I knew I had a deeper root. I started receiving his blows and bouncing him off—won a bunch of points. Then I made the mistake of coming straight in and he threw me on the floor—two points. If I lowered the sophistication of my game a hair, he destroyed me. He slipped into a zone and attacked hard. We were even with three seconds to go in the round. I uprooted him with a four-prong combination, most of which didn’t actually happen. Then I took the next point at the bell with a huge surge and won the round.

Round three, right leg forward again, this was where he liked it, but me too. We started trading points, back and forth, a war. My team was chanting Tiger, Tiger Buma Ye. (Bruce used to call me Tiger in the young chess days, and it stuck.) The rest of the crowd was chanting in Mandarin. They loved him, and I didn’t blame them. Then I noticed a hole. He had found the solution to my bear hug, trapping my right forward elbow so I couldn’t get outside of him—but if I flashed my mind to the bear hug, in jamming it he opened up his armpit to inside pummeling techniques. I started taking the underhook and tossing him left and right. Every point I was playing with invisible feints which he somehow felt, and then I exploited his reactions. Trippy idea. I was using his crazy perceptiveness against him. Finally I caught a throw where I got the right underhook and cranked him all the way over and around me. He hit the ground hard. In that moment I felt a wave of sorrow—like I killed the last unicorn. The match ended and we hugged. I told him he was an inspiration.

*  *  *

Fixed and Moving Step finals ahead, both against the Buffalo. We’d been measuring each other for the past two days. We both knew that this mammoth international competition would come down to our own little war. In Moving Step, he was a force of nature. He overwhelmed his opponents with bull rushes and highly evolved throws. His pummeling was incredible. Dan and I had broken his game down and saw that he integrated very precise trips and sweeps into most of his throws. I had to neutralize his footwork and power, not get steamrolled out of the ring, counterpunch, and look for holes. That was the plan.

There was a one-hour break before all the final matches. Fixed would be first, which was good—I’d seen a weakness in Buffalo’s structure and was hoping to get in his head before the Moving. I was ready for war, listening to “Lose Yourself” on the headphones. I felt myself steeling against the world, like a freight train that just had its brakes cut.

FIXED STEP WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP FINALS

Buffalo walked toward the Fixed Step ring, stopped just short of me, looked me dead in the eyes, and screamed something primal, from the gut, one note. A chant called back from the bleachers and then the stadium exploded. This was their man. Our wrists touched and he was all aggression. Good. I had to use that. Keep him there. On the first point he surged into an attack that put me airborne. Then he came right back at me, but I let him in, circled around his elbows with my hands and sank deep. Bear hug. He went right down, two points. At the beginning of every exchange we stood right leg forward, the backs of our wrists connected, waiting for the ref’s command to set play in motion. Those seconds of standoff are psychologically complex. You can calm an opponent or challenge his ego, make him lust for aggression. Over and over I lulled him forward with tiny little openings. He was like a bull seeing red, charging in hard and fast, and I was always gone before he connected. I won two points that the ref waved off. I heard people grumbling about the officiating, but at this point I didn’t care. I was a bit of a madman, deep in the zone. I knew that the only way to win was to win big. The bear hug was deadly against Buffalo’s power. He kept on hitting the floor and seemed confused. Round one was a blowout.

In round two I felt unstoppable. I didn’t care about the refs or the score. I kept winning one point after the next after the next and I heard Dan and my teammates chanting Tiger, Buma Ye, Tiger, Buma Ye. I was in his head and kept on coming. My father said this was his favorite match, that it was a beautiful, emotional experience to watch. To me it felt technical: I won it before stepping in the ring. Afterward my team mobbed me and Max lifted me into the air. The stadium was silent but for the voice of my pop and the guys around me. I was World Champion.

Now let’s see if I could do it twice.

MOVING STEP FINALS

Buffalo entered the ring screaming, wild, fists pumping the air. I had felt his mortality in Fixed, which was good, but the Moving Step would be his legacy. He’d trained his whole life to be World Champion. I had no solutions to his game, only ideas. He was surely the greater athlete. But maybe I was the better thinker. The bell rang and he went right on the attack, pummeling in for the underhooks. For a few seconds I fought for the inside position but he felt too powerful and I decided to give it to him—no reason to meet him head-on. His left arm pummeled deep under my right armpit and wrapped up my shoulder. My right foot was forward and my right arm locked down on his left upper arm. He had better leverage for edging me out and for certain throws, but I had some excellent weapons as well. When the timing felt right I cranked to the left. We went down hard together. I instigated the throw, but my left elbow touched just before he crashed down. His point, 1–0. My shirt was ripped up; I didn’t mind the cave man feeling, but the officials made me change it.

I’d lost the first point but felt potential. Play resumed, we connected, I disconnected, then came straight in on him and tried to jump around and take his back but he was too quick and wrapped me up. We separated, I danced around him, tried to enter fast and spin him but nothing there. We felt each other out. Then he cranked hard, I went with it, spun with the force and stayed on my feet, but when I landed he was on me, pushing hard. I rooted it out, but he kept on coming, relentless, and he edged me out of the ring. I’m down 2–0. About a minute to go in round one. I tried a couple of things but couldn’t find a hole. He was confident, too strong; I needed to use that strength, there was nothing else. I went into the clinch and leaned on him, let him feel my weight and also my exhaustion. He started to edge me out of the ring, and I let him take me there. He was cautious, tiny steps, no overextension. My back was to the edge, I planted my left foot an inch from the line, and exploded, drove hard against his right arm, screaming, putting everything I had into this throw. He couldn’t hold on and I took him out of the ring and then went down hard on top of him. It’s 2–1, eleven seconds left in the round. I needed a point and was tapped out. Dan was screaming, my whole team was chanting, Tiger, Tiger Buma Ye, faster and faster. I need to go buck wild now, need one point, gotta let it all hang out. The ref said “Go!” and I hit him like a truck, he gave a little, then held his ground, trying to hold on for the bell. I cranked and we started spinning, my back to the edge, then his, then mine again, total chaos. I screamed as I pulled hard and reversed him. He was on the edge but had the underhooks, was okay, incredible root, and then all I can say is that I reached deeper than I knew I had and won the most dramatic point of my life. With one second left I drove him out of the ring, launching through him and over him, landing him on his back, my shoulder into his and my head over him straight into the ground. The bell rang, the crowd went totally wild, even the Taiwanese; 2–2.

I had sixty seconds and was a dead man. I lay panting on my back for almost all of that time. On the video, Buffalo looks physically strong but upset. Max rubbed my shoulders, I slowed down my breathing, thought I’d be okay by the bell. Hoped. Wasn’t so sure.

Round two. He entered the ring like an enraged beast and the bleachers erupted in chants. I remember getting to my feet and walking slowly to the center, hoping I could reach it without falling over. He attacked immediately and the force went through me, into the ground. It felt like an electric current and I bounced him off, awake now, ready to roll. No more pain. He came at me again and cranked hard into a throw while sweeping out my right foot, but I felt it coming, stepped up with my left, and neutralized it while crimping his arms. I knew I had to watch that footwork, very dangerous. We went back into the clinch. I gave him the left underhook and clamped down on the arm. He probed for a hole and I held him off, waiting, listening; the game had grown smaller now, everything slowing down. He switched his weight into his front leg to attack and I caught it, fired into a throw in that flash that he was stuck, his foot entering the ground, no way to move, and he went down with me right on top, my shoulder into his left side. Up 1–0. He came right back at me, shaking off the last moment with a bull rush, but I felt it coming and went with the force, pulled him a little farther and he hit the ground. Up 2–0. Then I pulled off another throw, catching the same hole in his footwork, perfect timing, inner reap, we both went up and I landed on him hard. I’m up 3–0!

Now I made my only real mistake of the tournament. I had him totally defeated, he came at me, and I popped him to the side, his left foot landing inches from the edge. Then I should have backed off or gone in slow, but I smelled the finish line and charged, overextended, and he put me down. Two points, 3–2, he’s back in it. My mistake. Not much time left. I’m spent, so is he. Here things really started to go out of control. He surged right at me. I used the force and almost put him down but he barely saved himself. We flew all over the place, him attacking, me neutralizing, counterattacking, him saving. I heard Max scream “Josh! Fifteen seconds!” I put a huge effort into a throw that he barely stopped. He charged, I warded it off, and I was exhausted; it felt like the fifteen seconds were over. Now, two years later, I see on the video—Max is waving at the timekeeper, the woman is standing holding the bell. What happened here was surreal. There were many witnesses, all with the same story. The clock hit 2:00 and the woman went to hit the bell but an official motioned for her not to ring it. Clock went to 2:04, :05, :06, we were scrambling in the ring, in total mayhem. I’d paced myself to last fifteen seconds and now I was way past blown out. I was up 3–2 and they were holding the bell. Everyone was screaming. I was dead on my feet, and the Buffalo put his heart, soul, blood, and guts into one more throw. I couldn’t hold it off and started to go; he piled down on top of me, won the point, and they rang the bell, 3–3.

Officially the first two rounds were tied. I was on my back, slowing down my breathing, far beyond the most exhausted I’d ever been. Max and Dan rubbed my arms and shoulders. The bell rang. Round three, it all comes down to this. I had the tie-break if we were even. At this point it is pure guts. Survival. You operate on another plane of reality, second to second, relying on your training to keep you standing. The round began and I held him off, then gave up the double underhooks and launched into a throw I’ve been working on for years and hadn’t shown yet at the tournament. I trapped his right arm under my left elbow, pulsed forward to provoke a reaction, and then turned left, rolling over my right shoulder and his trapped right arm, all my weight pulling down and away from his root. He flew over me in a big circle and we went down hard, my shoulder into his ribs. Perfectly executed, but the judges didn’t give it to me. I was too tired to be angry about it. They said we touched the floor at the same time. His ribs wouldn’t agree. No score. I didn’t have much left. We felt each other out for ten seconds, then he attacked, forced a lean, and spun me on the mat, lovely throw. I’m down 2–0. Trouble. Gotta dig deep. Find something.

Now he changed tactics and decided to hold me off, stalling out the round. I searched for over a minute, spent; on the video it looks like I gave up. My body went limp, then I saw a hole and exploded into the same throw they just took away from me, but at the end I pushed off hard (incidentally against my ankle, which was turned ninety degrees), arched my back, and landed flat on him so they couldn’t argue. My point, 2–1. Need one more from somewhere.

It felt like one of those video games where the endurance of the fighter is gone and you have to hold the other guy off, survive the barrage, until you’ve recovered enough to give him one more shot. That’s what I had to do, hold him off until I had a little bit in me, and then put every ounce of it into a throw that had to be perfectly timed because if it didn’t work I might just collapse.

Then I found a little opening. I got into the clinch, trapped his right arm, faked forward, and drove my whole being into a bicep throw. He went down, I landed on him, shoulder to ribs. The tying point. There were nineteen seconds left. All I have to do is hold him off and I win. Except at this moment everything turned very, very strange. Once again, the judges decided not to allow my throw. They claimed it was illegal. Now people rushed onto the floor, Americans and Taiwanese officials. Our team had cameras shooting the match and soon a gaggle of officials and players from both teams were looking into video cameras. The stadium went berserk with anger and confusion. The judges convened, the president of the Taiwanese federation, my teacher Master Chen, my whole team, my opponent’s team, everyone on the mats looking at the videos. There were fifteen minutes of mayhem, bickering, politics.

Interestingly, my opponent’s coach and his whole team considered the ruling against me an outrage—they told me this afterward. By all accounts my throw was legal. It was astonishing that hometown referees would do this in the final minute of a match for the world title. After a long dispute, the judges said this challenge would have to be resolved after the match. But for now, I was down by one, the throw would not be counted, and there were 19 seconds left. I had to continue or I would lose by forfeit. Well, in those 19 seconds I gave it my all. I attacked him with everything I had, made the situation totally chaotic and cranked into a throw that would have put him down in training, but he gave up his body, literally. His elbow bent all the way back; it was exploding inside, but he wouldn’t give up and stayed on his feet until the bell rang. Such heart!

Then I just sat down and watched chaos take over. Witnesses came from all over who had seen the clock run out in round two when the judge had refused to allow the woman to ring the bell. There was a meeting held in the center of the stadium with videos shown to the president of the Taiwanese Tai Chi Federation, to the judges, to everybody. My opponent’s coach, Chen Ze-Cheng’s father, an honorable man, agreed with the president that this was wrong. They suggested a shared championship. I went over to the head referee and demanded a clear winner. Overtime. I knew I could take him. The opposing coach agreed to a two-minute sudden death playoff to decide the World Championship. We would have international judges. They went to find the Buffalo. For twenty minutes I paced the arena, red hot—if there is a place beyond the zone, I was there. But it turned out that Buffalo’s elbow was too severely injured. The ruling was a shared title in Moving Step. In a flash, it was over. No more battles to fight. The martial fury subsided, and in its place came pain, mellowness and camaraderie. Buffalo and I swayed on the first place podium together, hugging, and holding each other up.
