# 2 - Shadows

**2**
**Shadows**
*There is no better, there is no more open door by which you can enter into the study of natural philosophy, than by considering the physical phenomena of a candle.*
Michael Faraday (*A Course of Six Lectures on the Chemical History of a Candle*)
 
In his popular Royal Institution lectures on science, Michael Faraday used to urge his audiences to learn about the world by considering what happens when a candle burns. I am going to consider an electric torch (or flashlight) instead. This is quite fitting, for much of the technology of an electric torch is based on Faraday’s discoveries.
I am going to describe some experiments which demonstrate phenomena that are at the core of quantum physics. Experiments of this sort, with many variations and refinements, have been the bread and butter of quantum optics for many years. There is no controversy about the results, yet even now some of them are hard to believe. The basic experiments are remarkably austere. They require neither specialized scientific instruments nor any great knowledge of mathematics or physics – essentially, they involve nothing but casting shadows. But the patterns of light and shadow that an ordinary electric torch can cast are very strange. When considered carefully they have extraordinary ramifications. Explaining them requires not just new physical laws but a new *level* of description and explanation that goes beyond what was previously regarded as being the scope of science. But first, it reveals  the existence of parallel universes. How can it? What conceivable pattern of shadows could have implications like that?
Imagine an electric torch switched on in an otherwise dark room. Light emanates from the filament of the torch’s bulb and fills out part of a cone. In order not to complicate the experiment with reflected light, the walls of the room should be totally absorbent, matt black. Alternatively, since we are only imagining these experiments, we could imagine a room of astronomical size, so that there is no time for any light to reach the walls and return before the experiment is completed. Figure 2.1 illustrates the situation. But it is somewhat misleading: if we were observing the torch from the side we should be able to see neither it nor, of course, its light. Invisibility is one of the more straightforward properties of light. We see light only if it enters our eyes (though we usually speak of seeing the object in our line of sight that last affected that light).
[Image: 005]
**FIGURE 2.1** *Light from an electric torch (flashlight).*
 
We cannot see light that is just passing by. If there were a reflective object in the beam, or even some dust or water droplets to scatter the light, we could see where it was. But there is nothing in the beam, and we are observing from outside it, so none of its light reaches us. An accurate representation of what we should see would be a completely black picture. If there were a second source of light we might be able to see the torch, but still not its light. Beams  of light, even the most intense light that we can generate (from lasers), pass through each other as if nothing were there at all.
Figure 2.1 does show that the light is brightest near the torch, and gets dimmer farther away as the beam spreads out to illuminate an ever larger area. To an observer within the beam, backing steadily away from the torch, the reflector would appear ever smaller and then, when it could only be seen as a single point, ever fainter. Or would it? Can light really be spread more and more thinly without limit? The answer is no. At a distance of approximately ten thousand kilometres from the torch, its light would be too faint for the human eye to detect and the observer would see nothing. That is, a human observer would see nothing; but what about an animal with more sensitive vision? Frogs’ eyes are several times more sensitive than human eyes – just enough to make a significant difference in this experiment. If the observer were a frog, and it kept moving ever farther away from the torch, the moment at which it entirely lost sight of the torch would never come. Instead, the frog would see the torch begin to flicker. The flickers would come at irregular intervals that would become longer as the frog moved farther away. But the brightness of the individual flickers would not diminish. At a distance of one hundred million kilometres from the torch, the frog would see on average only one flicker of light per day, but that flicker would be as bright as any that it observed at any other distance.
Frogs cannot tell us what they see. So in real experiments we use photomultipliers (light detectors which are even more sensitive than frogs’ eyes), and we thin out the light by passing it through dark filters, rather than by observing it from a hundred million kilometres away. But the principle is the same, and so is the result: neither apparent darkness nor uniform dimness, but flickering, with the individual flickers equally bright no matter how dark a filter we use. This flickering indicates that there is a limit to how thinly light can be evenly spread. Borrowing the terminology of goldsmiths, one might say that light is not infinitely ‘malleable’. Like gold, a small amount of light can be evenly spread over a very large area, but eventually if one tries to spread it out further it  gets lumpy. Even if gold atoms could somehow be prevented from clumping together, there is a point beyond which they cannot be subdivided without ceasing to be gold. So the only way in which one can make a one-atom-thick gold sheet even thinner is to space the atoms farther apart, with empty space between them. When they are sufficiently far apart it becomes misleading to think of them as forming a continuous sheet. For example, if each gold atom were on average several centimetres from its nearest neighbour, one might pass one’s hand through the ‘sheet’ without touching any gold at all. Similarly, there is an ultimate lump or ‘atom’ of light, a *photon*. Each flicker seen by the frog is caused by a photon striking the retina of its eye. What happens when a beam of light gets fainter is not that the photons themselves get fainter, but that they get farther apart, with empty space between them (Figure 2.2). When the beam is very faint it can be misleading to call it a ‘beam’, for it is not continuous. During periods when the frog sees nothing it is not because the light entering its eye is too weak to affect the retina, but because no light has entered its eye at all.
This property of appearing only in lumps of discrete sizes is called *quantization.* An individual lump, such as a photon, is called a *quantum* (plural *quanta).* Quantum theory gets its name from this property, which it attributes to all measurable physical quantities – not just to things like the amount of light, or the mass of gold, which are quantized because the entities concerned, though apparently continuous, are really made of particles. Even for quantities like distance (between two atoms, say), the notion of a continuous range of possible values turns out to be an idealization. There are no measurable continuous quantities in physics. There are many new effects in quantum physics, and on the face of it quantization is one of the tamest, as we shall see. Yet in a sense it remains the key to all the others, for if everything is quantized, how does any quantity change from one value to another? How does any object get from one *place* to another if there is not a continuous range of intermediate places for it to be on the way? I shall explain how in Chapter 9, but let me set that question aside for the moment and return to the vicinity of the torch, where the beam looks continuous because every second it pours about 10^14 (a hundred trillion) photons into an eye that looks into it.
[Image: 006]
**FIGURE 2.2** *Frogs can see individual photons.*
 
Is the boundary between the light and the shadow perfectly sharp, or is there a grey area? There is usually a fairly wide grey area, and one reason for this is shown in Figure 2.3. There is a dark region (called the *umbra*) where light from the filament cannot reach. There is a bright region which can receive light from anywhere on the filament. And because the filament is not a geometrical point, but has a certain size, there is also a *penumbra* between the bright and dark regions: a region which can receive light from some parts of the filament but not from others. If one observes from within the penumbra, one can see only part of the filament and the illumination is less there than in the fully illuminated, bright region.
However, the size of the filament is not the only reason why real torchlight casts penumbras. The light is affected in all sorts of other ways by the reflector behind the bulb, by the glass front of the torch, by various seams and imperfections, and so on. So we expect quite a complicated pattern of light and shadow from a real torch, just because the torch itself is quite complicated. But the incidental properties of torches are not the subject of these experiments. Behind our question about torchlight there is a more fundamental question about light in general: is there, in principle, any limit on how sharp a shadow can be (in other words, on how narrow a penumbra can be)? For instance, if the torch were made of perfectly black (non-reflecting) material, and if one were to use smaller and smaller filaments, could one then make the penumbra narrower and narrower, without limit?
 [Image: 007]
**FIGURE 2.3** *The umbra and penumbra of a shadow.*
 
Figure 2.3 makes it look as though one could: if the filament had no size, there would be no penumbra. But in drawing Figure 2.3 I have made an assumption about light, namely that it travels only in straight lines. From everyday experience we know that it does, for we cannot see round corners. But careful experiments show that light does not always travel in straight lines. Under some circumstances it bends.
This is hard to demonstrate with a torch alone, just because it is difficult to make very tiny filaments and very black surfaces. These practical difficulties mask the limits that fundamental physics imposes on the sharpness of shadows. Fortunately, the bending of light can also be demonstrated in a different way. Suppose that the light of a torch passes through two successive small holes in otherwise opaque screens, as shown in Figure 2.4, and that the emerging light falls on a third screen beyond. Our question now is this: if the experiment is repeated with ever smaller holes and with ever  greater separation between the first and second screens, can one bring the umbra – the region of total darkness – ever closer, without limit, to the straight line through the centres of the two holes? Can the illuminated region between the second and third screens be confined to an arbitrarily narrow cone? In goldsmiths’ terminology, we are now asking something like ‘how “ductile” is light’ – how fine a thread can it be drawn into? Gold can be drawn into threads one ten-thousandth of a millimetre thick.
[Image: 008]
**FIGURE 2.4** *Making a narrow beam by passing light through two successive holes.*
 
It turns out that light is not as ductile as gold! Long before the holes get as small as a ten-thousandth of a millimetre, in fact even with holes as large as a millimetre or so in diameter, the light begins noticeably to rebel. Instead of passing through the holes in straight lines, it refuses to be confined and spreads out after each hole. And as it spreads, it ‘frays’. The smaller the hole is, the more the light spreads out from its straight-line path. Intricate patterns of light and shadow appear. We no longer see simply a bright region and a dark region on the third screen, with a penumbra in between, but instead concentric rings of varying thickness and brightness. There is also colour, because white light consists of a mixture of photons of various colours, and each colour spreads and frays in a slightly different pattern. Figure 2.5 shows a typical pattern that might be formed on the third screen by white light that has passed through holes in the first two screens. Remember,  there is nothing happening here but the casting of a shadow. Figure 2.5 is just the shadow that would be cast by the second screen in Figure 2.4. If light travelled only in straight lines, there would only be a tiny white dot (much smaller than the central bright spot in Figure 2.5), surrounded by a very narrow penumbra. Outside that there would be pure umbra – total darkness.
[Image: 009]
**FIGURE 2.5** *The pattern of light and shadow formed by white light after passing through a small circular hole.*
 
Puzzling though it may be that light rays should bend when passing through small holes, it is not, I think, fundamentally disturbing. In any case, what matters for our present purposes is that it does bend. This means that shadows in general need not look like silhouettes of the objects that cast them. What is more, this is not just a matter of blurring, caused by penumbras. It turns out that an obstacle with an intricate pattern of holes can cast a shadow of an entirely different pattern.
Figure 2.6 shows, at roughly its actual size, a part of the pattern of shadows cast three metres from a pair of straight, parallel slits in an otherwise opaque barrier. The slits are one-fifth of a  millimetre apart, and illuminated by a parallel-sided beam of pure red light from a laser on the other side of the barrier. Why laser light and not torchlight? Only because the precise shape of a shadow also depends on the colour of the light in which it is cast; white light, as produced by a torch, contains a mixture of all visible colours, so it can cast shadows with multicoloured fringes. Therefore in experiments about the precise shapes of shadows we are better off using light of a single colour. We could put a coloured filter (such as a pane of coloured glass) over the front of the torch, so that only light of that colour would get through. That would help, but filters are not all that discriminating. A better method is to use laser light, for lasers can be tuned very accurately to emit light of whatever colour we choose, with almost no other colour present.
[Image: 010]
**FIGURE 2.6** *The shadow cast by a barrier containing two straight, parallel slits.*
 
If light travelled in straight lines, the pattern in Figure 2.6 would consist simply of a pair of bright bands one-fifth of a millimetre apart (too close to distinguish on this scale), with sharp edges and with the rest of the screen in shadow. But in reality the light bends in such a way as to make many bright bands and dark bands, and no sharp edges at all. If the slits are moved sideways, so long as they remain within the laser beam, the pattern also moves by the same amount. In this respect it behaves exactly like an ordinary large-scale shadow. Now, what sort of shadow is cast if we cut a second, identical pair of slits in the barrier, interleaved with the existing pair, so that we have four slits at intervals of one-tenth of a millimetre? We might expect the pattern to look almost exactly like Figure 2.6. After all, the first pair of slits, by itself, casts the shadows in Figure 2.6, and as I have just said, the second pair, by itself, would cast the same pattern, shifted about a tenth of a  millimetre to the side – in almost the same place. We even know that light beams normally pass through each other unaffected. So the two pairs of slits together should give essentially the same pattern again, though twice as bright and slightly more blurred.
In reality, though, what happens is nothing like that. The real shadow of a barrier with four straight, parallel slits is shown in Figure 2.7(a). For comparison I have repeated, below it, the illustration of the two-slit pattern (Figure 2.7(b)). Clearly, the four-slit shadow is not a combination of two slightly displaced two-slit shadows, but has a new and more complicated pattern. In this pattern there are places, such as the point marked X, which are dark on the four-slit pattern, but bright on the two-slit pattern. These places were bright when there were two slits in the barrier, but *went dark* when we cut a second pair of slits for the light to pass through. Opening those slits has *interfered* with the light that was previously arriving at X.
So, adding two more light sources darkens the point X; removing them illuminates it again. How? One might imagine two photons heading towards X and bouncing off each other like billiard balls. Either photon alone would have hit X, but the two together interfere with each other so that they both end up elsewhere. I shall show in a moment that this explanation cannot be true. Nevertheless, the basic idea of it is inescapable: *something* must be coming through that second pair of slits to prevent the light from the first pair from reaching X. But what? We can find out with the help of some further experiments.
[Image: 011]
**FIGURE 2.7** *The shadows cast by a barrier containing (a) four and (b) two straight, parallel slits.*
 
First, the four-slit pattern of Figure 2.7(a) appears only if all four slits are illuminated by the laser beam. If only two of them are illuminated, a two-slit pattern appears. If three are illuminated, a three-slit pattern appears, which looks different again. So whatever causes the interference is in the light beam. The two-slit pattern also reappears if two of the slits are filled by anything opaque, but not if they are filled by anything transparent. In other words, the interfering entity is obstructed by anything that obstructs light, even something as insubstantial as fog. But it can penetrate anything that allows light to pass, even something as impenetrable (to matter) as diamond. If complicated systems of mirrors and lenses are placed anywhere in the apparatus, so long as light can travel from each slit to a particular point on the screen, what will be observed at that point will be part of a four-slit pattern. If light from only two slits can reach a particular point, part of a two-slit pattern will be observed there, and so on.
So, whatever causes interference behaves like light. It is found everywhere in the light beam and nowhere outside it. It is reflected, transmitted or blocked by whatever reflects, transmits or blocks light. You may be wondering why I am labouring this point. Surely it is obvious that it *is* light; that is, what interferes with photons from each slit is photons from the other slits. But you may be inclined to doubt the obvious after the next experiment, the denouement of the series.
What should we expect to happen when these experiments are performed *with only one photon at a time?* For instance, suppose that our torch is moved so far away that only one photon per day is falling on the screen. What will our frog, observing from the screen, see? If it is true that what interferes with each photon is other photons, then shouldn’t the interference be lessened when the photons are very sparse? Should it not cease altogether when there is only one photon passing through the apparatus at any one time? We might still expect penumbras, since a photon might be capable of changing course when passing through a slit (perhaps  by striking a glancing blow at the edge). But what we surely could not observe is any place on the screen, such as X, that receives photons when two slits are open, but which *goes dark* when two more are opened.
Yet that is exactly what we do observe. However sparse the photons are, the shadow pattern remains the same. Even when the experiment is done with one photon at a time, none of them is ever observed to arrive at X when all four slits are open. Yet we need only close two slits for the flickering at X to resume.
Could it be that the photon splits into fragments which, after passing through the slits, change course and recombine? We can rule that possibility out too. If, again, we fire one photon through the apparatus, but use four detectors, one at each slit, then at most one of them ever registers anything. Since in such an experiment we never observe two of the detecters going off at once, we can tell that the entities that they detect are not splitting up.
So, if the photons do not split into fragments, and are not being deflected by other photons, what does deflect them? When a single photon at a time is passing through the apparatus, what can be coming through the other slits to interfere with it?
Let us take stock. We have found that when one photon passes through this apparatus,it passes through one of the slits, and then something interferes with it, deflecting it in a way that depends on what other slits are open;
 
the interfering entities have passed through some of the other slits;
 
the interfering entities behave exactly like photons . . .
. . . except that they cannot be seen.

I shall now start calling the interfering entities ‘photons’. That is what they are, though for the moment it does appear that photons come in two sorts, which I shall temporarily call *tangible* photons and *shadow* photons. Tangible photons are the ones we can see, or  detect with instruments, whereas the shadow photons are intangible (invisible) – detectable only indirectly through their interference effects on the tangible photons. (Later, we shall see that there is no intrinsic difference between tangible and shadow photons: each photon is tangible in one universe and intangible in all the other parallel universes – but I anticipate.) What we have inferred so far is only that each tangible photon has an accompanying retinue of shadow photons, and that when a photon passes through one of our four slits, some shadow photons pass through the other three slits. Since different interference patterns appear when we cut slits at other places in the screen, provided that they are within the beam, shadow photons must be arriving all over the illuminated part of the screen whenever a tangible photon arrives. Therefore there are many more shadow photons than tangible ones. How many? Experiments cannot put an upper bound on the number, but they do set a rough lower bound. In a laboratory the largest area that we could conveniently illuminate with a laser might be about a square metre, and the smallest manageable size for the holes might be about a thousandth of a millimetre. So there are about 10^12 (one trillion) possible hole-locations on the screen. Therefore there must be at least a trillion shadow photons accompanying each tangible one.
Thus we have inferred the existence of a seething, prodigiously complicated, hidden world of shadow photons. They travel at the speed of light, bounce off mirrors, are refracted by lenses, and are stopped by opaque barriers or filters of the wrong colour. Yet they do not trigger even the most sensitive detectors. The only thing in the universe that a shadow photon can be observed to affect is the tangible photon that it accompanies. That is the phenomenon of interference. Shadow photons would go entirely unnoticed were it not for this phenomenon and the strange patterns of shadows by which we observe it.
Interference is not a special property of photons alone. Quantum theory predicts, and experiment confirms, that it occurs for every sort of particle. So there must be hosts of shadow neutrons accompanying every tangible neutron, hosts of shadow electrons accompanying every electron, and so on. Each of these shadow particles is detectable only indirectly, through its interference with the motion of its tangible counterpart.
It follows that reality is a much bigger thing than it seems, and most of it is invisible. The objects and events that we and our instruments can directly observe are the merest tip of the iceberg.
Now, tangible particles have a property that entitles us to call them, collectively, a *universe.* This is simply their defining property of being tangible, that is, of interacting with each other, and hence of being directly detectable by instruments and sense organs made of other tangible particles. Because of the phenomenon of interference, they are not *wholly* partitioned off from the rest of reality (that is, from the shadow particles). If they were, we should never have discovered that there is more to reality than tangible particles. But to a good approximation they do resemble the universe that we see around us in everyday life, and the universe referred to in classical (pre-quantum) physics.
For similar reasons, we might think of calling the shadow particles, collectively, a *parallel universe,* for they too are affected by tangible particles only through interference phenomena. But we can do better than that. For it turns out that shadow particles are partitioned among themselves in exactly the same way as the universe of tangible particles is partitioned from them. In other words, they do not form a single, homogeneous parallel universe vastly larger than the tangible one, but rather a huge number of parallel universes, each similar in composition to the tangible one, and each obeying the same laws of physics, but differing in that the particles are in different positions in each universe.
A remark about terminology. The word ‘universe’ has traditionally been used to mean ‘the whole of physical reality’. In that sense there can be at most one universe. We could stick to that definition, and say that the entity we have been accustomed to calling ‘the universe’ – namely, all the directly perceptible matter and energy around us, and the surrounding space – is not the whole universe after all, but only a small portion of it. Then we should have to invent a new name for that small, tangible portion. But most  physicists prefer to carry on using the word ‘universe’ to denote the same entity that it has always denoted, even though that entity now turns out to be only a small part of physical reality. A new word, *multiverse,* has been coined to denote physical reality as a whole.
Single-particle interference experiments such as I have been describing show us that the multiverse exists and that it contains many counterparts of each particle in the tangible universe. To reach the further conclusion that the multiverse is roughly partitioned into parallel universes, we must consider interference phenomena involving more than one tangible particle. The simplest way of doing this is to ask, by way of a ‘thought experiment’, what must be happening at the microscopic level when shadow photons strike an opaque object. They are stopped, of course: we know that because interference ceases when an opaque barrier is placed in the paths of shadow photons. But why? What stops them? We can rule out the straightforward answer – that they are absorbed, like tangible photons would be, by the tangible atoms in the barrier. For one thing, we know that shadow photons do not interact with tangible atoms. For another, we can verify by measuring the atoms in the barrier (or more precisely, by replacing the barrier by a detector) that they neither absorb energy nor change their state in any way unless they are struck by tangible photons. Shadow photons have no effect.
To put that another way, shadow photons and tangible photons are affected in identical ways when they reach a given barrier, but the barrier itself is not identically affected by the two types of photon. In fact, as far as we can tell, it is not affected by shadow photons at all. That is indeed the defining property of shadow photons, for if any material were observably affected by them, that material could be used as a shadow-photon detector and the entire phenomenon of shadows and interference would not be as I have described it.
Hence there is some sort of shadow barrier at the same location as the tangible barrier. It takes no great leap of imagination to conclude that this shadow barrier is made up of the *shadow atoms* that we already know must be present as counterparts of the  tangible atoms in the barrier. There are very many of them present for each tangible atom. Indeed, the total density of shadow atoms in even the lightest fog would be more than sufficient to stop a tank, let alone a photon, *if* they could all affect it. Since we find that partially transparent barriers have the same degree of transparency for shadow photons as for tangible ones, it follows that not all the shadow atoms in the path of a particular shadow photon can be involved in blocking its passage. Each shadow photon encounters much the same sort of barrier as its tangible counterpart does, a barrier consisting of only a tiny proportion of all the shadow atoms that are present.
For the same reason, each shadow atom in the barrier can be interacting with only a small proportion of the other shadow atoms in its vicinity, and the ones it does interact with form a barrier much like the tangible one. And so on. All matter, and all physical processes, have this structure. If the tangible barrier is the frog’s retina, then there must be many shadow retinas, each capable of stopping only one of the shadow-counterparts of each photon. Each shadow retina only interacts strongly with the corresponding shadow photons, and with the corresponding shadow frog, and so on. In other words, particles are grouped into parallel universes. They are ‘parallel’ in the sense that within each universe particles interact with each other just as they do in the tangible universe, but each universe affects the others only weakly, through interference phenomena.
Thus we have reached the conclusion of the chain of reasoning that begins with strangely shaped shadows and ends with parallel universes. Each step takes the form of noting that the behaviour of objects that we observe can be explained only if there are unobserved objects present, and if those unobserved objects have certain properties. The heart of the argument is that single-particle interference phenomena unequivocally rule out the possibility that the tangible universe around us is all that exists. There is no disputing the fact that such interference phenomena occur. Yet the existence of the multiverse is still a minority view among physicists. Why?
The answer, I regret to say, does not reflect well upon the  majority. I shall have more to say about this in Chapter 13, but for the moment let me point out that the arguments I have presented in this chapter are compelling only to those who seek explanations. Those who are satisfied with mere prediction, and who have no strong desire to understand how the predicted outcomes of experiments come about, may if they wish simply deny the existence of anything other than what I have been calling ‘tangible’ entities. Some people, such as instrumentalists and positivists, take this line as a matter of philosophical principle. I have already said what I think of such principles, and why. Other people just don’t want to think about it. After all, it is such a *large* conclusion, and such a disturbing one on first hearing. But I think that those people are making a mistake. As I hope to persuade readers who bear with me, understanding the multiverse is a precondition for understanding reality as best we can. Nor is this said in a spirit of grim determination to seek the truth no matter how unpalatable it may be (though I hope I would take that attitude if it came to it). It is, on the contrary, because the resulting world-view is so much more integrated, and makes more sense in so many ways, than any previous world-view, and certainly more than the cynical pragmatism which too often nowadays serves as a surrogate for a world-view among scientists.
‘Why can’t we just say,’ some pragmatic physicists ask, ‘that photons behave *as if* they were interacting with invisible entities? Why can we not leave it at that? Why do we have to go on to take a position about whether those invisible entities are really there?’ A more exotic variant of what is essentially the same idea is the following. ‘A tangible photon is real; a shadow photon is merely a way in which the real photon could possibly have behaved, but did not. Thus quantum theory is about the *interaction of the real with the possible.’* This, at least, sounds suitably profound. But unfortunately the people who take either of these views – including some eminent scientists who ought to know better – invariably lapse into mumbo-jumbo at that point. So let us keep cool heads. The key fact is that a real, tangible photon *behaves differently* according to what paths are open, elsewhere in the apparatus, for  something to travel along and eventually intercept the tangible photon. Something does travel along those paths, and to refuse to call it ‘real’ is merely to play with words. ‘The possible’ cannot interact with the real: non-existent entities cannot deflect real ones from their paths. If a photon is deflected, it must have been deflected by something, and I have called that thing a ‘shadow photon’. Giving it a name does not make it real, but it cannot be true that an actual event, such as the arrival and detection of a tangible photon, is caused by an imaginary event such as what that photon ‘could have done’ but did not do. It is only what really happens that can cause other things really to happen. If the complex motions of the shadow photons in an interference experiment were mere possibilities that did not in fact take place, then the interference phenomena we see would not, in fact, take place.
The reason why interference effects are usually so weak and hard to detect can be found in the quantum-mechanical laws that govern them. Two particular implications of those laws are relevant. First, every subatomic particle has counterparts in other universes, and is interfered with only by those counterparts. It is not directly affected by any other particles in those universes. Therefore interference is observed only in special situations where the paths of a particle and its shadow counterparts separate and then reconverge (as when a photon and shadow photon are heading towards the same point on the screen). Even the timing must be right: if one of the two paths involves a delay, the interference is reduced or prevented. Second, the detection of interference between any two universes requires an interaction to take place between *all the particles whose positions and other attributes are not identical* in the two universes. In practice this means that interference is strong enough to be detected only between universes that are very alike. For example, in all the experiments I have described, the interfering universes differ only in the position of one photon. If a photon affects other particles in its travels, and in particular if it is observed, then those particles or the observer will also become differentiated in different universes. If so, subsequent interference involving that photon will be undetectable in practice because the requisite interaction  between *all* the affected particles is too complicated to arrange. I must mention here that the standard phrase for describing this fact, namely ‘observation destroys interference’, is very misleading in three ways. First, it suggests some sort of psychokinetic effect of the conscious ‘observer’ on basic physical phenomena, though there is no such effect. Second, the interference is not ‘destroyed’: it is just (much!) harder to observe because doing so involves controlling the precise behaviour of many more particles. And third, it is not just ‘observation’, but *any* effect of the photon on its surroundings that depends on which path the photon has taken, that does this.
For the benefit of readers who may have seen other accounts of quantum physics, I must briefly make contact between the argument I have given in this chapter and the way the subject is usually presented. Perhaps because the debate began among theoretical physicists, the traditional starting-point has been quantum theory itself. One states the theory as carefully as possible, and then one tries to understand what it tells us about reality. That is the only possible approach if one wants to understand the finer details of quantum phenomena. But as regards the issue of whether reality consists of one universe or many, it is an unnecessarily complicated approach. That is why I have not followed it in this chapter. I have not even stated any of the postulates of quantum theory – I have merely described some physical phenomena and drawn inescapable conclusions. But if one does start from theory, there are two things that everyone agrees on. The first is that quantum theory is unrivalled in its ability to predict the outcomes of experiments, even if one blindly uses its equations without worrying much about what they mean. The second is that quantum theory tells us something new and bizarre about the nature of reality. The dispute is only about what exactly this is. The physicist Hugh Everett was the first to understand clearly (in 1957, some thirty years after the theory became the basis of subatomic physics) that quantum theory describes a multiverse. Ever since, the argument has raged about whether the theory admits of any other interpretation (or reinterpretation, or reformulation, or modification, etc.) in which it describes a single universe, but continues correctly to predict the  outcomes of experiments. In other words, does accepting the predictions of quantum theory force us to accept the existence of parallel universes?
It seems to me that this question, and therefore the whole prevailing tone of the debate on this issue, is wrong-headed. Admittedly, it is right and proper for theoretical physicists such as myself to devote a great deal of effort to trying to understand the formal structure of quantum theory, but not at the expense of losing sight of our primary objective, which is to understand reality. Even if the predictions of quantum theory could, somehow, be made without referring to more than one universe, individual photons would still cast shadows in the way I have described. Without knowing anything of quantum theory, one can see that those shadows could not be the result of any single history of the photon as it travels from the torch to the observer’s eye. They are incompatible with any explanation in terms of only the photons that we see. Or in terms of only the barrier that we see. Or in terms of only the universe that we see. Therefore, if the best theory available to physics did not refer to parallel universes, it would merely mean that we needed a better theory, one that did refer to parallel universes, in order to explain what we see.
So, does accepting the predictions of quantum theory force us to accept the existence of parallel universes? Not in itself. We can always reinterpret any theory along instrumentalist lines so that it does not force us to accept anything about reality. But that is beside the point. As I have just said, we do not need deep theories to tell us that parallel universes exist – single-particle interference phenomena tell us that. What we need deep theories for is to explain and predict such phenomena: to tell us what the other universes are like, what laws they obey, how they affect one another, and how all this fits in with the theoretical foundations of other subjects. That is what quantum theory does. The quantum theory of parallel universes is not the problem, it is the solution. It is not some troublesome, optional interpretation emerging from arcane theoretical considerations. It is the explanation – the only one that is tenable – of a remarkable and counter-intuitive reality.
So far, I have been using temporary terminology which suggests that one of the many parallel universes differs from the others by being ‘tangible’. It is time to sever that last link with the classical, single-universe conception of reality. Let us go back to our frog. We have seen that the story of the frog that stares at the distant torch for days at a time, waiting for the flicker that comes on average once a day, is not the whole story, because there must also be shadow frogs, in shadow universes that co-exist with the tangible one, also waiting for photons. Suppose that our frog is trained to jump when it sees a flicker. At the beginning of the experiment, the tangible frog will have a large set of shadow counterparts, all initially alike. But shortly afterwards they will no longer all be alike. Any particular one of them is unlikely to see a photon immediately. But what is a rare event in any one universe is a common event in the multiverse as a whole. At any instant, somewhere in the multiverse, there are a few universes in which one of the photons is currently striking the retina of the frog in that universe. And that frog jumps.
Why exactly does it jump? Because within its universe it obeys the same laws of physics as tangible frogs do, and its shadow retina has been struck by a shadow photon belonging to that universe. One of the light-sensitive shadow molecules in that shadow retina has responded by undergoing complex chemical changes, to which the shadow frog’s optic nerve has in turn responded. It has transmitted a message to the shadow frog’s brain, and the frog has consequently experienced the sensation of seeing a flicker.
Or should I say ‘the *shadow* sensation of seeing a flicker’? Surely not. If ‘shadow’ observers, be they frogs or people, are real, then their sensations must be real too. When they observe what we might call a shadow object, they observe that it is tangible. They observe this by the same means, and according to the same definition, as we apply when we say that the universe we observe is ‘tangible’. Tangibility is relative to a given observer. So objectively there are not two kinds of photon, tangible and shadow, nor two kinds of frog, nor two kinds of universe, one tangible and the rest shadow. There is nothing in the description I have given of the  formation of shadows, or any of the related phenomena, that distinguishes between the ‘tangible’ and the ‘shadow’ objects, apart from the mere assertion that one of the copies is ‘tangible’. When I introduced tangible and shadow photons I apparently distinguished them by saying that we can see the former, but not the latter. But who are ‘we’? While I was writing that, hosts of shadow Davids were writing it too. They too drew a distinction between tangible and shadow photons; but the photons they called ‘shadow’ include the ones I called ‘tangible’, and the photons they called ‘tangible’ are among those I called ‘shadow’.
Not only do none of the copies of an object have any privileged position in the explanation of shadows that I have just outlined, neither do they have a privileged position in the full mathematical explanation provided by quantum theory. I may feel subjectively that I am distinguished among the copies as the ‘tangible’ one, because I can directly perceive myself and not the others, but I must come to terms with the fact that all the others feel the same about themselves.
Many of those Davids are at this moment writing these very words. Some are putting it better. Others have gone for a cup of tea.
