# 3 - Problem-solving

**3**
**Problem-solving**
I do not know which is stranger – the behaviour of shadows itself, or the fact that contemplating a few patterns of light and shadow can force us to revise so radically our conception of the structure of reality. The argument I have outlined in the previous chapter is, notwithstanding its controversial conclusion, a typical piece of scientific reasoning. It is worth reflecting on the character of this reasoning, which is itself a natural phenomenon at least as surprising and full of ramifications as the physics of shadows.
To those who would prefer reality to have a more prosaic structure, it may seem somehow out of proportion – unfair, even – that such momentous consequences can flow from the fact that a tiny spot of light on a screen should be *here* rather than *there.* Yet they do, and this is by no means the first time in the history of science that such a thing has happened. In this respect the discovery of other universes is quite reminiscent of the discovery of other planets by early astronomers. Before we sent space probes to the Moon and planets, *all* our information about planets came from spots of light (or other radiation) being observed in one place rather than another. Consider how the original, defining fact about planets – the fact that they are not stars – was discovered. Watching the night sky for a few hours, one sees that the stars appear to revolve about a particular point in the sky. They revolve rigidly, holding fixed positions relative to one another. The traditional explanation was that the night sky was a huge ‘celestial sphere’ revolving around the fixed Earth, and that the stars were either holes in the sphere or glowing embedded crystals. However, among the thousands of  points of light in the sky visible to the naked eye, there are a handful of the brightest which, over longer periods, do not move as if they were fixed on a celestial sphere. They wander about the sky in more complex motions. They are called ‘planets’, from the Greek word meaning ‘wanderer’. Their wandering was a sign that the celestial-sphere explanation was inadequate.
Successive explanations of the motions of planets have played an important role in the history of science. Copernicus’s *heliocentric theory* placed the planets and the Earth in circular orbits round the Sun. Kepler discovered that the orbits are ellipses rather than circles. Newton explained the ellipses through his inverse-square law of gravitational forces, and his theory was later used to predict that the mutual gravitational attraction of planets would cause small deviations from elliptical orbits. The observation of such deviations led to the discovery in 1846 of a new planet, Neptune, one of many discoveries that spectacularly corroborated Newton’s theory. Nevertheless, a few decades later Einstein’s general theory of relativity gave us a fundamentally different explanation of gravity, in terms of curved space and time, and thereby predicted slightly different motions again. For instance, it correctly predicted that every year the planet Mercury would drift by about one ten-thousandth of a degree away from where Newton’s theory said it should be. It also implied that starlight passing close to the Sun would be deflected twice as much by gravity as Newton’s theory would predict. The observation of this deflection by Arthur Eddington in 1919 is often deemed to mark the moment at which the Newtonian world-view ceased to be rationally tenable. (Ironically, modern reappraisals of the accuracy of Eddington’s experiment suggest that this may have been premature.) The experiment, which has since been repeated with great accuracy, involved measuring the positions of spots (the images of stars close to the limb of the Sun during an eclipse) on a photographic plate.
As astronomical predictions became more accurate, the differences between what successive theories predicted about the appearance of the night sky diminished. Ever more powerful telescopes and measuring instruments have had to be constructed to detect the  differences. However, the explanations underlying these predictions have not been converging. On the contrary, as I have just outlined, there has been a succession of revolutionary changes. Thus observations of ever smaller physical effects have been forcing ever greater changes in our world-view. It may therefore seem that we are inferring ever grander conclusions from ever scantier evidence. What justifies these inferences? Can we be sure that just because a star appeared millimetrically displaced on Eddington’s photographic plate, space and time must be curved; or that because a photodetector at a certain position does not register a ‘hit’ in weak light, there must be parallel universes?
Indeed, what I have just said understates both the fragility and the indirectness of all experimental evidence. For we do not directly perceive the stars, spots on photographic plates, or any other external objects or events. We see things only when images of them appear on our retinas, and we do not perceive even those images until they have given rise to electrical impulses in our nerves, and those impulses have been received and interpreted by our brains. Thus the physical evidence that directly sways us, and causes us to adopt one theory or world-view rather than another, is less than millimetric: it is measured in thousandths of a millimetre (the separation of nerve fibres in the optic nerve), and in hundredths of a volt (the change in electric potential in our nerves that makes the difference between our perceiving one thing and perceiving another).
However, we do not accord equal significance to all our sensory impressions. In scientific experiments we go to great lengths to bring to our perceptions those aspects of external reality that we think might help us to distinguish between rival theories we are considering. Before we even make an observation, we decide carefully where and when we should look, and what we should look for. Often we use complex, specially constructed instruments, such as telescopes and photomultipliers. Yet however sophisticated the instruments we use, and however substantial the external causes to which we attribute their readings, we perceive those readings exclusively through our own sense organs. There is no getting away from the fact that we human beings are small creatures with only  a few inaccurate, incomplete channels through which we receive all information from outside ourselves. We interpret this information as evidence of a large and complex external universe (or multiverse). But when we are weighing up this evidence, we are literally contemplating nothing more than patterns of weak electric current trickling through our own brains.
What justifies the inferences we draw from these patterns? It is certainly not a matter of logical deduction. There is no way of *proving* from these or from any other observations that the external universe, or multiverse, exists at all, let alone that the electric currents received by our brains stand in any particular relationship to it. Anything or everything that we perceive might be an illusion or a dream. Illusions and dreams are, after all, common. *Solipsism,* the theory that only one mind exists and that what appears to be external reality is only a dream taking place in that mind, cannot be logically disproved. Reality *might* consist of one person, presumably you, dreaming a lifetime’s experiences. Or it might consist of just you and me. Or just the planet Earth and its inhabitants. And if we dreamed evidence – any evidence – of the existence of other people, or other planets, or other universes, that would prove nothing about how many of those things there really are.
Since solipsism, and an infinity of related theories, are logically consistent with your perceiving any possible observational evidence, it follows that you can logically deduce nothing about reality from observational evidence. How, then, could I say that the observed behaviour of shadows ‘rules out’ the theory that there is only one universe, or that eclipse observations make the Newtonian world-view ‘rationally untenable’? How can that be so? If ‘ruling out’ does not mean ‘disproving’, what does it mean? Why should we feel compelled to change our world-view, or indeed any opinion at all, on account of something being ‘ruled out’ in that sense? This critique seems to cast doubt on the whole of science – on any reasoning about external reality that appeals to observational evidence. If scientific reasoning does not amount to sequences of logical deductions from the evidence, what does it amount to? Why should we accept its conclusions?
This is known as the ‘problem of induction’. The name derives from what was, for most of the history of science, the prevailing theory of how science works. The theory was that there exists, short of mathematical proof, a lesser but still worthy form of justification called *induction.* Induction was contrasted, on the one hand, with the supposedly perfect justification provided by *de*duction, and on the other hand with supposedly weaker philosophical or intuitive forms of reasoning that do not even have observational evidence to back them up. In the inductivist theory of scientific knowledge, observations play two roles: first, in the discovery of scientific theories, and second, in their justification. A theory is supposed to be discovered by ‘extrapolating’ or ‘generalizing’ the results of observations. Then, if large numbers of observations conform to the theory, and none deviates from it, the theory is supposed to be justified – made more believable, probable or reliable. The scheme is illustrated in Figure 3.1.
The inductivist analysis of my discussion of shadows would therefore go something like this: ‘We make a series of observations of shadows, and see interference phenomena (stage 1). The results conform to what would be expected if there existed parallel universes which affect one another in certain ways. But at first no one notices this. Eventually (stage 2) someone forms the generalization that interference will *always* be observed under the given circumstances, and thereby induces the theory that parallel universes are responsible. With every further observation of interference (stage 3) we become a little more convinced of that theory. After a sufficiently long sequence of such observations, and provided that none of them ever contradicts the theory, we conclude (stage 4) that the theory is true. Although we can never be absolutely sure, we are for practical purposes convinced.’
It is hard to know where to begin in criticizing the inductivist conception of science – it is so profoundly false in so many different ways. Perhaps the worst flaw, from my point of view, is the sheer *non sequitur* that a generalized prediction is tantamount to a new theory. Like all scientific theories of any depth, the theory that there are parallel universes simply does not have the form of a generalization from the observations. Did we observe first one universe, then a second and a third, and then induce that there are trillions of them? Was the generalization that planets will ‘wander’ round the sky in one pattern rather than another, equivalent to the theory that planets are worlds, in orbit round the Sun, and that the Earth is one of them? It is also not true that repeating our observations is the way in which we become convinced of scientific theories. As I have said, theories are explanations, not merely predictions. If one does not accept a proposed explanation of a set of observations, making the observations over and over again is seldom the remedy. Still less can it help us to create a satisfactory explanation when we cannot think of one at all.
[Image: 012]
**FIGURE 3.1** *The inductivist scheme.*
 
Furthermore, even mere predictions can never be justified by observational evidence, as Bertrand Russell illustrated in his story of the chicken. (To avoid any possible misunderstanding, let me stress that this was a metaphorical, anthropomorphic chicken, representing a human being trying to understand the regularities of the universe.) The chicken noticed that the farmer came every day to feed it. It predicted that the farmer would continue to bring food every day. Inductivists think that the chicken had ‘extrapolated’ its observations into a theory, and that each feeding time added justification to that theory. Then one day the farmer came and wrung the chicken’s neck. The disappointment experienced by Russell’s chicken has also been experienced by trillions of other chickens. This inductively justifies the conclusion that induction cannot justify any conclusions!
However, this line of criticism lets inductivism off far too lightly. It does illustrate the fact that repeated observations cannot *justify* theories, but in doing so it entirely misses (or rather, accepts) a more basic misconception: namely, that the inductive extrapolation of observations to *form* new theories is even possible. In fact, it is  impossible to extrapolate observations unless one has already placed them within an explanatory framework. For example, in order to ‘induce’ its false prediction, Russell’s chicken must first have had in mind a false explanation of the farmer’s behaviour. Perhaps it guessed that the farmer harboured benevolent feelings towards chickens. Had it guessed a different explanation – that the farmer was trying to fatten the chickens up for slaughter, for instance – it would have ‘extrapolated’ the behaviour differently. Suppose that one day the farmer starts bringing the chickens more food than usual. How one extrapolates this new set of observations to predict the farmer’s future behaviour depends entirely on how one explains it. According to the benevolent-farmer theory, it is evidence that the farmer’s benevolence towards chickens has increased, and that therefore the chickens have even less to worry about than before. But according to the fattening-up theory, the behaviour is ominous – it is evidence that slaughter is imminent.
The fact that the same observational evidence can be ‘extrapolated’ to give two diametrically opposite predictions according to which explanation one adopts, and cannot justify either of them, is not some accidental limitation of the farmyard environment: it is true of all observational evidence under all circumstances. Observations could not possibly play either of the roles assigned to them in the inductivist scheme, even in respect of mere predictions, let alone genuine explanatory theories. Admittedly, inductivism is based on the common-sense theory of the growth of knowledge – that we learn from experience – and historically it was associated with the liberation of science from dogma and tyranny. But if we want to understand the true nature of knowledge, and its place in the fabric of reality, we must face up to the fact that inductivism is false, root and branch. No scientific reasoning, and indeed no successful reasoning of any kind, has ever fitted the inductivist description.
What, then, is the pattern of scientific reasoning and discovery? We have seen that inductivism and all other prediction-centred theories of knowledge are based on a misconception. What we need  is an explanation-centred theory of knowledge: a theory of how explanations come into being and how they are justified; a theory of how, why and when we should allow our perceptions to change our world-view. Once we have such a theory, we need no separate theory of predictions. For, given an explanation of some observable phenomenon, it is no mystery how one obtains predictions. And if one has justified an explanation, then any predictions derived from that explanation are automatically justified too.
Fortunately, the prevailing theory of scientific knowledge, which in its modern form is due largely to the philosopher Karl Popper (and which is one of my four ‘main strands’ of explanation of the fabric of reality), can indeed be regarded as a theory of explanations in this sense. It regards science as a *problem-solving* process. Inductivism regards the catalogue of our past observations as a sort of skeletal theory, supposing that science is all about filling in the gaps in that theory by interpolation and extrapolation. Problem-solving does begin with an inadequate theory – but not with the notional ‘theory’ consisting of past observations. It begins with our best existing theories. When some of those theories seem inadequate to us, and we want new ones, that is what constitutes a *problem.* Thus, contrary to the inductivist scheme shown in Figure 3.1, scientific discovery need not begin with observational evidence. But it does always begin with a problem. By a ‘problem’ I do not necessarily mean a practical emergency, or a source of anxiety. I just mean a set of ideas that seems inadequate and worth trying to improve. The existing explanation may seem too glib, or too laboured; it may seem unnecessarily narrow, or unrealistically ambitious. One may glimpse a possible unification with other ideas. Or a satisfactory explanation in one field may appear to be irreconcilable with an equally satisfactory explanation in another. Or it *may* be that there have been some surprising observations – such as the wandering of planets – which existing theories did not predict and cannot explain.
This last type of problem resembles stage 1 of the inductivist scheme, but only superficially. For an unexpected observation never initiates a scientific discovery unless the pre-existing theories  already contain the seeds of the problem. For example, clouds wander even more than planets do. This unpredictable wandering was presumably familiar long before planets were discovered. Moreover, predicting the weather would always have been valuable to farmers, seafarers and soldiers, so there would always have been an incentive to theorize about how clouds move. Yet it was not meteorology that blazed the trail for modern science, but astronomy. Observational evidence about meteorology was far more readily available than in astronomy, but no one paid much attention to it, and no one induced any theories from it about cold fronts or anticyclones. The history of science was not crowded with disputes, dogmas, heresies, speculations and elaborate theories about the nature of clouds and their motion. Why? Because under the established explanatory structure for weather, it was perfectly comprehensible that cloud motion should be unpredictable. Common sense suggests that clouds move with the wind. When they drift in other directions, it is reasonable to surmise that the wind can be different at different altitudes, and is rather unpredictable, and so it is easy to conclude that there is no more to be explained. Some people, no doubt, took this view about planets, and assumed that they were just glowing objects on the celestial sphere, blown about by high-altitude winds, or perhaps moved by angels, and that there was no more to be explained. But others were not satisfied with that, and guessed that there were deeper explanations behind the wandering of planets. So they searched for such explanations, and found them. At various times in the history of astronomy there appeared to be a mass of unexplained observational evidence; at other times only a scintilla, or none at all. But always, if people had chosen what to theorize about according to the cumulative number of observations of particular phenomena, they would have chosen clouds rather than planets. Yet they chose planets, and for diverse reasons. Some reasons depended on preconceptions about how cosmology ought to be, or on arguments advanced by ancient philosophers, or on mystical numerology. Some were based on the physics of the day, others on mathematics or geometry. Some have turned out to have objective merit, others not. But every one of  them amounted to this: it seemed to someone that the existing explanations could and should be improved upon.
One solves a problem by finding new or amended theories, containing explanations which do not have the deficiencies, but do retain the merits, of existing explanations (Figure 3.2). Thus, after a problem presents itself (stage 1), the next stage always involves *conjecture:* proposing new theories, or modifying or reinterpreting old ones, in the hope of solving the problem (stage 2). The conjectures are then *criticized* which, if the criticism is rational, entails examining and comparing them to see which offers the best explanations, according to the criteria inherent in the problem (stage 3). When a conjectured theory fails to survive criticism – that is, when it appears to offer worse explanations than other theories do – it is abandoned. If we find ourselves abandoning one of our originally held theories in favour of one of the newly proposed ones (stage 4), we tentatively deem our problem-solving enterprise to have made progress. I say ‘tentatively’, because subsequent problem-solving will probably involve altering or replacing even these new, apparently satisfactory theories, and sometimes even resurrecting some of the apparently unsatisfactory ones. Thus the solution, however good, is not the end of the story: it is a starting-point for the next problem-solving process (stage 5). This illustrates another of the misconceptions behind inductivism. In science the object of the exercise is not to find a theory that will, or is likely to, be deemed true for ever; it is to find the best theory available now, and if possible to improve on all available theories. A scientific argument is intended to persuade us that a given explanation is the best one available. It does not and could not say anything about how that explanation will fare when, in the future, it is subjected to new types of criticism and compared with explanations that have yet to be invented. A good explanation may make good predictions about the future, but the one thing that no explanation can even begin to predict is the content or quality of its own future rivals.
[Image: 013]
**FIGURE 3.2** *The problem-solving process.*
 
What I have described so far applies to all problem-solving, whatever the subject-matter or techniques of rational criticism that are involved. *Scientific* problem-solving always includes a particular method of rational criticism, namely *experimental testing.* Where two or more rival theories make conflicting predictions about the outcome of an experiment, the experiment is performed and the theory or theories that made false predictions are abandoned. The very construction of scientific conjectures is focused on finding explanations that have experimentally testable predictions. Ideally we are always seeking *crucial experimental tests –* experiments whose outcomes, whatever they are, will falsify one or more of the contending theories. This process is illustrated in Figure 3.3. Whether or not observations were involved in the instigating problem (stage 1), and whether or not (in stage 2) the contending theories were specifically designed to be tested experimentally, it is in this critical phase of scientific discovery (stage 3) that experimental tests play their decisive and characteristic role. That role is to render some of the contending theories unsatisfactory by revealing that their explanations lead to false predictions. Here I must mention an asymmetry which is important in the philosophy and methodology of science: the asymmetry between experimental refutation and experimental confirmation. Whereas an incorrect prediction automatically renders the underlying explanation unsatisfactory, a correct prediction says nothing at all about the underlying explanation. Shoddy explanations that yield correct predictions are two a penny, as UFO enthusiasts, conspiracy-theorists and pseudo-scientists of every variety should (but never do) bear in mind.
If a theory about observable events is untestable – that is, if no possible observation would rule it out – then it cannot by itself explain why those events happen in the way they are observed to and not in some other way. For example, the ‘angel’ theory of planetary motion is untestable because no matter how planets moved, that motion could be attributed to angels; therefore the angel theory cannot explain the particular motions that we see, unless it is supplemented by an independent theory of how angels move. That is why there is a methodological rule in science which says that once an experimentally testable theory has passed the appropriate tests, any *less* testable rival theories about the same phenomena are summarily rejected, for their explanations are bound to be inferior. This rule is often cited as distinguishing science from other types of knowledge-creation. But if we take the view that science is about explanations, we see that this rule is really a special case of something that applies naturally to all problem-solving: *theories that are capable of giving more detailed explanations are automatically preferred*. They are preferred for two reasons. One is that a theory that ‘sticks its neck out’ by being more specific about more phenomena opens up itself and its rivals to more forms of criticism, and therefore has more chance of taking the problem-solving process forward. The second is simply that, if such a theory survives the criticism, it leaves less unexplained - which is the object of the exercise.
[Image: 014]
**FIGURE 3.3** *The course of scientific discovery.*
 
I have already remarked that even in science most criticism does not consist of experimental testing. That is because most scientific criticism is directed not at a theory’s predictions but directly at the underlying explanations. Testing the predictions is just an indirect way (albeit an exceptionally powerful one, when available) of testing the explanations. In Chapter 1, I gave the example of the ‘grass cure’ – the theory that eating a kilogram of grass is a cure for the common cold. That theory and an infinity of others of the same ilk are readily testable. But we can criticize and reject them without bothering to do any experiments, purely on the grounds that they explain no more than the prevailing theories which they contradict, yet make new, unexplained assertions.
The stages of a scientific discovery shown in Figure 3.3 are seldom completed in sequence at the first attempt. There is usually repeated backtracking before each stage is completed – or rather, *solved,* for each stage may present a problem whose solution itself requires all five stages of a subsidiary problem-solving process. This applies even to stage 1, for the initiating problem itself is not immutable. If we cannot think of good candidate solutions we may return to stage 1 and try to reformulate the problem, or even choose a different problem. Indeed, apparent insolubility is only one of many reasons why we often find it desirable to modify problems we are solving. Some variants of a problem are inevitably more interesting, or more relevant to other problems; some are better formulated; some seem to be potentially more fruitful, or more urgent – or whatever. In many cases the issue of what precisely the problem is, and what the attributes of a ‘good’ explanation would be, receive as much criticism and conjecture as do trial solutions.
Similarly, if our criticisms at stage 3 fail to distinguish between rival theories, we try to invent new methods of criticism. If that does not seem to work we may backtrack to stage 2 and try to sharpen our proposed solutions (and existing theories) so as to get more explanations and predictions out of them and make it easier to find fault with them. Or we may again backtrack to stage 1 and try to find better criteria for the explanations to meet. And so on.
Not only is there constant backtracking, but the many subproblems all remain simultaneously active and are addressed opportunistically. It is only when the discovery is complete that a fairly sequential argument, in a pattern something like Figure 3.3, can be presented. It can begin with the latest and best version of the problem; then it can show how some of the rejected theories fail criticism; then it can set out the winning theory, and say why it survives criticism; then it can explain how one copes without the superseded theory; and finally it can point out some of the new problems that this discovery creates or allows for.
While a problem is still in the process of being solved we are dealing with a large, heterogeneous set of ideas, theories, and criteria, with many variants of each, all competing for survival. There  is a continual turnover of theories as they are altered or replaced by new ones. So all the theories are being subjected to *variation* and *selection,* according to criteria which are themselves subject to variation and selection. The whole process resembles biological evolution. A problem is like an ecological niche, and a theory is like a gene or a species which is being tested for viability in that niche. Variants of theories, like genetic mutations, are continually being created, and less successful variants become extinct when more successful variants take over. ‘Success’ is the ability to survive repeatedly under the selective pressures – criticism – brought to bear in that niche, and the criteria for that criticism depend partly on the physical characteristics of the niche and partly on the attributes of other genes and species (i.e. other ideas) that are already present there. The new world-view that may be implicit in a theory that solves a problem, and the distinctive features of a new species that takes over a niche, are *emergent* properties of the problem or niche. In other words, obtaining solutions is inherently complex. There is no simple way of discovering the true nature of planets, given (say) a critique of the celestial-sphere theory and some additional observations, just as there is no simple way of designing the DNA of a koala bear, given the properties of eucalyptus trees. Evolution, or trial and error – especially the focused, purposeful form of trial and error called scientific discovery – are the only ways.
For this reason, Popper has called his theory that knowledge can grow only by conjecture and refutation, in the manner of Figure 3.3, an *evolutionary epistemology.* This is an important unifying insight, and we shall see that there are other connections between these two strands. But I do not want to overstate the similarities between scientific discovery and biological evolution, for there are important differences too. One difference is that in biology variations (mutations) are random, blind and purposeless, while in human problem-solving the creation of new conjectures is itself a complex, knowledge-laden process driven by the intentions of the people concerned. Perhaps an even more important difference is that there is no biological equivalent of *argument.* All conjectures  have to be tested experimentally, which is one reason why biological evolution is slower and less efficient by an astronomically large factor. Nevertheless, the link between the two sorts of process is far more than mere analogy: they are two of my four intimately related ‘main strands’ of explanation of the fabric of reality.
Both in science and in biological evolution, evolutionary success depends on the creation and survival of *objective knowledge,* which in biology is called *adaptation.* That is, the ability of a theory or gene to survive in a niche is not a haphazard function of its structure but depends on whether enough true and useful information about the niche is implicitly or explicitly encoded there. I shall say more about this in Chapter 8.
We can now begin to see what justifies the inferences that we draw from observations. We never draw inferences from observations alone, but observations can become significant in the course of an argument when they reveal deficiencies in some of the contending explanations. We choose a scientific theory because arguments, only a few of which depend on observations, have satisfied us (for the moment) that the explanations offered by all known rival theories are less true, less broad or less deep.
Take a moment to compare Figures 3.1 and 3.3. Look how different these two conceptions of the scientific process are. Inductivism is observation- and prediction-based, whereas in reality science is problem- and explanation-based. Inductivism supposes that theories are somehow extracted or distilled from observations, or are justified by them, whereas in fact theories begin as unjustified conjectures in someone’s mind, which typically *precede* the observations that rule out rival theories. Inductivism seeks to justify predictions as likely to hold in the future. Problem-solving justifies an explanation as being better than other explanations available in the present. Inductivism is a dangerous and recurring source of many sorts of error, because it is superficially so plausible. But it is not true.
When we succeed in solving a problem, scientific or otherwise, we end up with a set of theories which, though they are not problem-free, we find preferable to the theories we started with.  What new attributes the new theories will have therefore depends on what we saw as the deficiencies in our original theories – that is, on what the problem was. Science is characterized by its problems as well as by its method. Astrologers who solve the problem of how to cast more intriguing horoscopes without risking being proved wrong are unlikely to have created much that deserves to be called scientific knowledge, even if they have used genuine scientific methods (such as market research) and are themselves quite satisfied with the solution. The problem in genuine science is always to understand some aspect of the fabric of reality, by finding explanations that are as broad and deep, and as true and specific, as possible.
When we think that we have solved a problem, we naturally adopt our new set of theories in preference to the old set. That is why science, regarded as explanation-seeking and problem-solving, raises no ‘problem of induction’. There is no mystery about why we should feel compelled tentatively to accept an explanation when it is the best explanation we can think of.
