# 4 - Criteria for Reality

**4**
**Criteria for Reality**
The great physicist Galileo Galilei, who was arguably also the first physicist in the modern sense, made many discoveries not only in physics itself but also in the methodology of science. He revived the ancient idea of expressing general theories about nature in mathematical form, and improved upon it by developing the method of systematic experimental testing, which characterizes science as we know it. He aptly called such tests *cimenti*, or ‘ordeals’. He was one of the first to use telescopes to study celestial objects, and he collected and analysed evidence for the heliocentric theory, the theory that the Earth moves in orbit around the Sun and spins about its own axis. He is best known for his advocacy of that theory, and for the bitter conflict with the Church into which that advocacy brought him. In 1633 the Inquisition tried him for heresy, and forced him under the threat of torture to kneel and read aloud a long, abject recantation saying that he ‘abjured, cursed and detested’ the heliocentric theory. (Legend has it, probably incorrectly, that as he rose to his feet he muttered the words *‘eppur si muove. . .’,* meaning ‘and yet, it does move. . .’.) Despite his recantation, he was convicted and sentenced to house arrest, under which he remained for the rest of his life. Although this punishment was comparatively lenient, it achieved its purpose handsomely. As Jacob Bronowski put it:
The result was silence among Catholic scientists everywhere from then on . . . The effect of the trial and of the imprisonment was to put a total stop to the scientific tradition in the Mediterranean. (*The Ascent of Man*, p. 218)
How could a dispute about the layout of the solar system have such far-reaching consequences, and why did the participants pursue it so passionately? Because the real dispute was not about whether the solar system had one layout rather than another: it was about Galileo’s brilliant advocacy of a new and dangerous way of thinking about reality. Not about the existence of reality, for both Galileo and the Church believed in *realism,* the common-sense view that an external physical universe really does exist and does affect our senses, including senses enhanced by instruments such as telescopes. Where Galileo differed was in his conception of the relationship between physical reality on the one hand, and human ideas, observations and reason on the other. He believed that the universe could be understood in terms of universal, mathematically formulated laws, and that reliable knowledge of these laws was accessible to human beings if they applied his method of mathematical formulation and systematic experimental testing. As he put it, ‘the Book of Nature is written in mathematical symbols’. This was in conscious comparison with that other Book on which it was more conventional to rely.
Galileo understood that if his method was indeed reliable, then wherever it was applicable its conclusions had to be preferable to those obtained by any other method. Therefore he insisted that scientific reasoning took precedence not only over intuition and common sense, but also over religious doctrine and revelation. It was specifically that idea, and not the heliocentric theory as such, that the authorities considered dangerous. (And they were right, for if any idea can be said to have initiated the scientific revolution and the Enlightenment, and to have provided the secular foundation of modern civilization, it is that one.) It was forbidden to ‘hold or defend’ the heliocentric theory *as an explanation* of the appearance of the night sky. But using the heliocentric theory, writing about it, holding it ‘as a mathematical supposition’ or defending it as a method of making predictions were all permitted. That was why Galileo’s book *Dialogue of the Two Chief World Systems*, which compared the heliocentric theory with the official geocentric theory, had been cleared for printing by the Church censors. The Pope had  even acquiesced in advance to Galileo’s writing such a book (though at the trial a misleading document was produced, claiming that Galileo had been forbidden to discuss the issue at all).
It is an interesting historical footnote that in Galileo’s time it was not yet indisputable that the heliocentric theory gave better predictions than the geocentric theory. The available observations were not very accurate. *Ad hoc* modifications had been proposed to improve the accuracy of the geocentric theory, and it was hard to quantify the predictive powers of the two rival theories. Furthermore, when it comes to details, there is more than one heliocentric theory. Galileo believed that the planets move in circles, while in fact their orbits are very nearly ellipses. So the data did not fit the *particular* heliocentric theory that Galileo was defending either. (So much, then, for his having been convinced by accumulated observations!) But for all that, the Church took no position in this controversy. The Inquisition did not care where the planets *appeared* to be; what they cared about was reality. They cared where the planets really were, and they wanted to understand the planets through explanations, just as Galileo did. Instrumentalists and positivists would say that since the Church was perfectly willing to accept Galileo’s observational predictions, further argument between them was pointless, and that his muttering *‘eppur si muove’* was strictly meaningless. But Galileo knew better, and so did the Inquisition. When they denied the reliability of scientific knowledge, it was precisely the explanatory part of that knowledge that they had in mind.
Their world-view was false, but it was not illogical. Admittedly they believed in revelation and traditional authority as sources of reliable knowledge. But they also had an independent reason for criticizing the reliability of knowledge obtained by Galileo’s methods. They could simply point out that no amount of observation or argument can ever prove that one explanation of a physical phenomenon is true and another false. As they would put it, God could produce the same observed effects in an infinity of different ways, so it is pure vanity and arrogance to claim to possess a way  of knowing, merely through one’s own fallible observation and reason, which way He chose.
To some extent they were merely arguing for modesty, for a recognition of human fallibility. And if Galileo was claiming that the heliocentric theory was somehow proven, or nearly so, in some inductive sense, they had a point. If Galileo thought that his methods could confer on any theory an authority comparable to that which the Church claimed for its doctrines, they were right to criticize him as arrogant (or, as they would have put it, blasphemous), though of course by the same standard they were much more arrogant themselves.
So how can we defend Galileo against the Inquisition? What should Galileo’s defence have been in the face of this charge of claiming too much when he claimed that scientific theories contain reliable knowledge of reality? The Popperian defence of science as a process of problem-solving and explanation-seeking is not sufficient in itself. For the Church too was primarily interested in explanations and not predictions, and it was quite willing to let Galileo solve problems using any theory he chose. It was just that they did not accept that Galileo’s solutions (which they would call mere ‘mathematical hypotheses’) had any bearing on external reality. Problem-solving, after all, is a process that takes place entirely within human minds. Galileo may have seen the world as a book in which the laws of nature are written in mathematical symbols. But that is strictly a metaphor; there are no explanations in orbit out there with the planets. The fact is that all our problems and solutions are located within ourselves, having been created by ourselves. When we solve problems in science we arrive through argument at theories whose explanations seem best to us. So, without in any way denying that it is right and proper, and useful, for us to solve problems, the Inquisition and modern sceptics might legitimately ask what scientific problem-solving has to do with reality. We may find our ‘best explanations’ psychologically satisfying. We may find them helpful in making predictions. We certainly find them essential in every area of technological creativity. All this does justify our continuing to seek them and to use  them in those ways. But why should we be obliged to take them as fact? The proposition that the Inquisition forced Galileo to endorse was in effect this: that the Earth is in fact at rest, with the Sun and planets in motion around it; but that the paths on which these astronomical bodies travel are laid out in a complex way which, when viewed from the vantage-point of the Earth, is also consistent with the Sun being at rest and the Earth and planets being in motion. Let me call that the ‘Inquisition’s theory’ of the solar system. If the Inquisition’s theory were true, we should still expect the heliocentric theory to make accurate predictions of the results of all Earth-based astronomical observations, even though it would be factually false. It would therefore seem that any observations that appear to support the heliocentric theory lend equal support to the Inquisition’s theory.
One could extend the Inquisition’s theory to account for more detailed observations that support the heliocentric theory, such as observations of the phases of Venus, and of the small additional motions (called ‘proper motions’) of some stars relative to the celestial sphere. To do this one would have to postulate even more complex manoeuvrings in space, governed by laws of physics very different from those that operate on our supposedly stationary Earth. But they would be different in precisely such a way as to remain observationally consistent with the Earth being in motion and the laws being the same out there as they are here. Many such theories are possible. Indeed, if making the right predictions were our only constraint, we could invent theories which say that anything we please is going on in space. For example, observations alone can never rule out the theory that the Earth is enclosed in a giant planetarium showing us a simulation of a heliocentric solar system; and that outside the planetarium there is anything you like, or nothing at all. Admittedly, to account for present-day observations the planetarium would also have to redirect our radar and laser pulses, capture our space probes, and indeed astronauts, send back fake messages from them and return them with appropriate moonrock samples, altered memories, and so on. It may be an absurd theory, but the point is that it cannot be ruled out by  experiment. Nor is it valid to rule out any theory solely on the grounds that it is ‘absurd’: the Inquisition, together with most of the human race in Galileo’s time, thought it the epitome of absurdity to claim that the Earth is moving. After all, we cannot feel it moving, can we? When it does move, as in an earthquake, we feel that unmistakably. It is said that Galileo delayed publicly advocating the heliocentric theory for some years, not for fear of the Inquisition but simply for fear of ridicule.
To us, the Inquisition’s theory looks hopelessly contrived. Why should we accept such a complicated and *ad hoc* account of why the sky looks as it does, when the unadorned heliocentric cosmology does the same job with less fuss? We may cite the principle of Occam’s razor: ‘do not multiply entities beyond necessity’ – or, as I prefer to put it, ‘do not complicate explanations beyond necessity’, because if you do, the unnecessary complications themselves remain unexplained. However, whether an explanation is or is not ‘contrived’ or ‘unnecessarily complicated’ depends on all the other ideas and explanations that make up one’s world-view. The Inquisition would have argued that the idea of the Earth moving is an unnecessary complication. It contradicts common sense; it contradicts Scripture; and (they would have said) there is a perfectly good explanation that does without it.
But is there? Does the Inquisition’s theory really provide alternative explanations without having to introduce the counter-intuitive ‘complication’ of the heliocentric system? Let us take a closer look at how the Inquisition’s theory explains things. It explains the apparent stationarity of the Earth by saying that it *is* stationary. So far, so good. On the face of it that explanation is better than Galileo’s, for he had to work very hard, and contradict some common-sense notions of force and inertia, to explain why we do not feel the Earth move. But how does the Inquisition’s theory cope with the more difficult task of explaining planetary motions?
The heliocentric theory explains them by saying that the planets are seen to move in complicated loops across the sky because they are really moving in simple circles (or ellipses) in space, but the Earth is moving as well. The Inquisition’s explanation is that the  planets are seen to move in complicated loops because they really are moving in complicated loops in space; *but* (and here, according to the Inquisition’s theory, comes the essence of the explanation) this complicated motion is governed by a simple underlying principle: namely, that the planets move in such a way that, when viewed from the Earth, they appear just as they would if they and the Earth were in simple orbits round the Sun.
To understand planetary motions in terms of the Inquisition’s theory, it is essential that one should understand this principle, for the constraints it imposes are the basis of every detailed explanation that one can make under the theory. For example, if one were asked why a planetary conjunction occurred on such-and-such a date, or why a planet backtracked across the sky in a loop of a particular shape, the answer would always be ‘because that is how it would look if the heliocentric theory were true’. So here is a cosmology – the Inquisition’s cosmology – that can be understood only in terms of a different cosmology, the heliocentric cosmology that it contradicts but faithfully mimics.
If the Inquisition had seriously tried to understand the world in terms of the theory they tried to force on Galileo, they would also have understood its fatal weakness, namely that it fails to solve the problem it purports to solve. It does not explain planetary motions ‘without having to introduce the complication of the heliocentric system’. On the contrary, it unavoidably incorporates that system as part of its own principle for explaining planetary motions. One cannot understand the world through the Inquisition’s theory unless one understands the heliocentric theory first.
Therefore we are right to regard the Inquisition’s theory as a convoluted elaboration of the heliocentric theory, rather than vice versa. We have arrived at this conclusion not by judging the Inquisition’s theory against modern cosmology, which would have been a circular argument, but by insisting on taking the Inquisition’s theory seriously, in its own terms, as an explanation of the world. I have mentioned the grass-cure theory, which can be ruled out without experimental testing because it contains no explanation. Here we have a theory which can also be ruled out without  experimental testing, because it contains a bad explanation – an explanation which, in its own terms, is worse than its rival.
As I have said, the Inquisition were realists. Yet their theory has this in common with solipsism: both of them draw an arbitrary boundary beyond which, they claim, human reason has no access - or at least, beyond which problem-solving is no path to understanding. For solipsists, the boundary tightly encloses their own brains, or perhaps just their abstract minds or incorporeal souls. For the Inquisition, it enclosed the entire Earth. Some present-day Creationists believe in a similar boundary, not in space but in time, for they believe that the universe was created only six thousand years ago, complete with misleading evidence of earlier events. *Behaviourism* is the doctrine that it is not meaningful to explain human behaviour in terms of inner mental processes. To behaviourists, the only legitimate psychology is the study of people’s observable responses to external stimuli. Thus they draw exactly the same boundary as solipsists, separating the human mind from external reality; but while solipsists deny that it is meaningful to reason about anything outside that boundary, behaviourists deny that it is meaningful to reason about anything inside.
There is a large class of related theories here, but we can usefully regard them all as variants of solipsism. They differ in where they draw the boundary of reality (or the boundary of that part of reality which is comprehensible through problem-solving), and they differ in whether, and how, they seek knowledge outside that boundary. But they all consider scientific rationality and other problem-solving to be inapplicable outside the boundary – a mere game. They might concede that it can be a satisfying and useful game, but it is nevertheless only a game from which no valid conclusion can be drawn about the reality outside.
They are also alike in their basic objection to problem-solving as a means of creating knowledge, which is that it does not deduce its conclusions from any ultimate source of justification. Within the respective boundaries that they choose, the adherents of all these theories do rely on the methodology of problem-solving, confident that seeking the best available explanation is also the way of finding  the truest available theory. But for the truth of what lies outside those boundaries, they look elsewhere, and what they all seek is a source of ultimate justification. For religious people, divine revelation can play that role. Solipsists trust only the direct experience of their own thoughts, as expressed in Rene Descartes’s classic argument *cogito ergo sum* (‘I think, therefore I exist’).
Despite Descartes’s desire to base his philosophy on this supposedly firm foundation, he actually allowed himself many other assumptions, and he was certainly no solipsist. Indeed, there can have been very few, if any, genuine solipsists in history. Solipsism is usually defended only as a means of attacking scientific reasoning, or as a stepping-stone to one of its many variants. By the same token, a good way of defending science against a variety of criticisms, and of understanding the true relationship between reason and reality, is to consider the argument against solipsism.
There is a standard philosophical joke about a professor who gives a lecture in defence of solipsism. So persuasive is the lecture that as soon as it ends, several enthusiastic students hurry forward to shake the professor’s hand. ‘Wonderful. I agreed with every word,’ says one student earnestly. ‘So did I,’ says another. ‘I am very gratified to hear it,’ says the professor. ‘One so seldom has the opportunity to meet fellow solipsists.’
Implicit in this joke there is a genuine argument against solipsism. One could put it like this. What, exactly, was the theory that the students in the story were agreeing with? Was it the professor’s theory, that they themselves do not exist because only the professor exists? To believe that, they would first have had to find some way round Descartes’s *cogito ergo sum* argument. And if they managed that, they would not be solipsists, for the central thesis of solipsism is that the solipsist exists. Or has each student been persuaded of a theory *contradicting* the professor’s, the theory that that particular student exists, but the professor and the other students do not? That would indeed make them all solipsists, but none of the students would be agreeing with the theory that the professor was defending. Therefore neither of these two possibilities amounts to the students’ having been persuaded by the professor’s defence of  solipsism. If they adopt the professor’s opinion, they will not be solipsists, and if they become solipsists, they will have become convinced that the professor is mistaken.
This argument is trying to show that solipsism is literally indefensible, because by accepting such a defence one is implicitly contradicting it. But our solipsistic professor could try to evade that argument by saying something like this: ‘I can and do consistently defend solipsism. Not against other people, for there are no other people, but against opposing arguments. These arguments come to my attention through dream-people, who behave as if they were thinking beings whose ideas often oppose mine. My lecture and the arguments it contains were not intended to persuade these dream-people, but to persuade myself – to help me to clarify my ideas.’
However, if there are sources of ideas that behave *as if* they were independent of oneself, then they necessarily *are* independent of oneself. For if I define ‘myself’ as the conscious entity that has the thoughts and feelings I am aware of having, then the ‘dream-people’ I seem to interact with are by definition something other than that narrowly defined self, and so I must concede that something other than myself exists. My only other option, if I were a committed solipsist, would be to regard the dream-people as creations of my unconscious mind, and therefore as part of ‘myself’ in a looser sense. But then I should be forced to concede that ‘myself’ had a very rich structure, most of which is independent of my conscious self. Within that structure are entities – dream-people - who, despite being mere constituents of the mind of a supposed solipsist, behave exactly as if they were committed *anti*-solipsists. So I could not call myself wholly a solipsist, for only my narrowly defined self would take that view. Many, apparently most, of the opinions held within my mind as a whole would oppose solipsism. I could study the ‘outer’ region of myself and find that it seems to obey certain laws, the same laws as the dream-textbooks say apply to what they call the physical universe. I would find that there is far more of the outer region than the inner region. Aside from containing more ideas, it is also more complex, more varied, and has more  measurable variables, by a literally astronomical factor, than the inner region.
Moreover, this outer region is amenable to scientific study, using the methods of Galileo. Because I have now been forced to define that region as part of myself, solipsism no longer has any argument against the validity of such study, which is now defined as no more than a form of introspection. Solipsism allows, indeed assumes, that knowledge of oneself can be obtained through introspection. It cannot declare the entities and processes being studied to be unreal, since the reality of the self is its basic postulate.
Thus we see that if we take solipsism seriously – if we assume that it is true and that all valid explanations must scrupulously conform to it - it self-destructs. How exactly does solipsism, taken seriously, differ from its common-sense rival, realism? The difference is based on no more than a renaming scheme. Solipsism insists on referring to objectively different things (such as external reality and my unconscious mind, or introspection and scientific observation) by the same names. But then it has to reintroduce the distinction through explanations in terms of something like the ‘outer part of myself’. But no such extra explanations would be necessary without its insistence on an inexplicable renaming scheme. Solipsism must also postulate the existence of an additional class of processes – invisible, inexplicable processes which give the mind the illusion of living in an external reality. The solipsist, who believes that nothing exists other than the contents of one mind, must also believe that that mind is a phenomenon of greater multiplicity than is normally supposed. It contains other-people-like thoughts, planet-like thoughts and laws-of-physics-like thoughts. These thoughts are real. They develop in a complex way (or pretend to), and they have enough autonomy to surprise, disappoint, enlighten or thwart that other class of thoughts which call themselves ‘I’. Thus the solipsist’s explanation of the world is in terms of interacting thoughts rather than interacting objects. But those thoughts are real, and interact according to the same rules that the realist says govern the interaction of objects. Thus solipsism, far from being a world-view stripped to its essentials, is actually just  realism disguised and weighed down by additional unnecessary assumptions – worthless baggage, introduced only to be explained away.
By this argument we can dispense with solipsism and all the related theories. They are all indefensible. Incidentally, we have already rejected one world-view on these grounds, namely positivism (the theory that all statements other than those describing or predicting observations are meaningless). As I remarked in Chapter 1, positivism asserts its own meaninglessness, and therefore cannot be consistently defended.
So we can continue, reassured, with common-sense realism and the pursuit of explanations by scientific methods. But in the light of this conclusion, what can we say about the arguments that made solipsism and its relatives superficially plausible, namely that they could neither be proved false nor ruled out by experiment? What is the status of those arguments now? If we have neither proved solipsism false nor ruled it out by experiment, what *have* we done?
There is an assumption built into this question. It is that theories can be classified in a hierarchy, ‘mathematical’ → ‘scientific’ → ‘philosophical’, of decreasing intrinsic reliability. Many people take the existence of this hierarchy for granted, despite the fact that these judgements of comparative reliability depend entirely on philosophical arguments, arguments that classify themselves as quite unreliable! In fact, the idea of this hierarchy is a cousin of the reductionist mistake I discussed in Chapter 1 (the theory that microscopic laws and phenomena are more fundamental than emergent ones). The same assumption occurs in inductivism, which supposes that we can be absolutely certain of the conclusions of mathematical arguments because they are deductive, reasonably sure of scientific arguments because they are ‘inductive’, and forever undecided about philosophical arguments, which it sees as little more than matters of taste.
But none of that is true. Explanations are not justified by the means by which they were derived; they are justified by their superior ability, relative to rival explanations, to solve the problems they address. That is why the argument that a theory is *indefensible*  can be so compelling. A prediction, or any assertion, that cannot be defended might still be true, but an explanation that cannot be defended is not an explanation. The rejection of ‘mere’ explanations on the grounds that they are not justified by any *ultimate* explanation inevitably propels one into futile searches for an ultimate source of justification. There is no such source.
Nor is there that hierarchy of reliability from mathematical to scientific to philosophical arguments. Some philosophical arguments, including the argument against solipsism, are far more compelling than any scientific argument. Indeed, every scientific argument assumes the falsity not only of solipsism, but also of other philosophical theories including any number of variants of solipsism that might contradict specific parts of the scientific argument. I shall also show (in Chapter 10) that even purely mathematical arguments derive their reliability from the physical and philosophical theories that underpin them, and therefore that they cannot, after all, yield absolute certainty.
Having embraced realism, we are continually faced with decisions as to whether entities referred to in competing explanations are real or not. Deciding that they are not real – as we did in the case of the ‘angel’ theory of planetary motion – is equivalent to rejecting the corresponding explanation. Thus, in searching for and judging explanations, we need more than just a refutation of solipsism. We need to develop reasons for accepting or rejecting the existence of entities that may appear in contending theories; in other words, we need a criterion for reality. We should not, of course, expect to find a final or an infallible criterion. Our judgements of what is or is not real always depend on the various explanations that are available to us, and sometimes change as our explanations improve. In the nineteenth century, few things would have been regarded more confidently as real than the force of gravity. Not only did it figure in Newton’s then-unrivalled system of laws, but everyone could feel it, all the time, even with their eyes shut – or so they thought. Today we understand gravity through Einstein’s theory rather than Newton’s, and we know that no such force exists. We do *not* feel it! What we feel is the resistance that  prevents us from penetrating the solid ground beneath our feet. Nothing is pulling us downwards. The only reason why we fall downwards when unsupported is that the fabric of space and time in which we exist is curved.
Not only do explanations change, but our criteria and ideas about what should count as an explanation are gradually changing (improving) too. So the list of acceptable modes of explanation will always be open-ended, and consequently the list of acceptable criteria for reality must be open-ended too. But what is it about an explanation — given that, for whatever reasons, we find it satisfactory — that should make us classify some things as real and others as illusory or imaginary?
James Boswell relates in his *Life of Johnson* how he and Dr Johnson were discussing Bishop Berkeley’s solipsistic theory of the non-existence of the material world. Boswell remarked that although no one believed the theory, no one could refute it either. Dr Johnson kicked a large rock and said, as his foot rebounded, ‘I refute it *thus*.’ Dr Johnson’s point was that Berkeley’s denial of the rock’s existence is incompatible with finding an explanation of the rebound that he himself felt. Solipsism cannot accommodate any explanation of why that experiment — or any experiment — should have one outcome rather than another. To explain the effect that the rock had on him, Dr Johnson was forced to take a position on the nature of rocks. Were they part of an autonomous external reality, or were they figments of his imagination? In the latter case he would have to conclude that ‘his imagination’ was itself a vast, complex, autonomous universe. The same dilemma confronted the solipsistic professor who, if pressed for explanations, would be forced to take a position on the nature of the audience. And the Inquisition would have had to take a position on the source of the underlying regularity in the motion of planets, a regularity that is explicable only by reference to the heliocentric theory. For all these people, taking their own position seriously as an explanation of the world would lead them directly to realism and Galilean rationality.
But Dr Johnson’s idea is more than a refutation of solipsism. It also illustrates the criterion for reality that is used in science,  namely, *if something can kick back, it exists*. ‘Kicking back’ here does not necessarily mean that the alleged object is responding to being kicked — to being physically affected as Dr Johnson’s rock was. It is enough that when we ‘kick’ something, the object affects us in ways that require independent explanation. For example, Galileo had no means of affecting planets, but he could affect the light that came from them. His equivalent of kicking the rock was refracting that light through the lenses of his telescopes and eyes. That light responded by ‘kicking’ his retina back. The way it kicked back allowed him to conclude not only that the light was real, but that the heliocentric planetary motions required to explain the patterns in which the light arrived were also real.
By the way, Dr Johnson did not directly kick the rock either. A person is a mind, not a body. The Dr Johnson who performed the experiment was a mind, and that mind directly ‘kicked’ only some nerves, which transmitted signals to muscles, which propelled his foot towards the rock. Shortly afterwards, Dr Johnson perceived being ‘kicked back’ by the rock, but again only indirectly, after the impact had set up a pressure pattern in his shoe, and then in his skin, and had then led to electrical impulses in his nerves, and so forth. Dr Johnson’s mind, like Galileo’s and everyone else’s, ‘kicked’ nerves and ‘was kicked back’ by nerves, and inferred the existence and properties of reality from those interactions alone. *What* Dr Johnson was entitled to infer about reality depends on how he could best explain what had happened. For example, if the sensation had seemed to depend only on the extension of his leg, and not on external factors, then he would probably have concluded that it was a property of his leg, or of his mind alone. He might have been suffering from a disease which gave him a rebounding sensation whenever he extended his leg in a certain way. But in fact the rebounding depended on what the rock did, such as being in a certain place, which was in turn related to other effects that the rock had, such as being seen, or affecting other people who kicked it. Dr Johnson perceived these effects to be autonomous (independent of himself) and quite complicated. Therefore the realist explanation of why the rock produces the rebounding  sensation involves a complicated story about something autonomous. But so does the solipsist explanation. In fact, any explanation that accounts for the foot-rebounding phenomenon is necessarily a ‘complicated story about something autonomous’. It must in effect be the story of the rock. The solipsist would call it a dream-rock, but apart from that claim the solipsist’s story and the realist’s could share the same script.
My discussion of shadows and parallel universes in Chapter 2 revolved around questions of what does or does not exist, and implicitly around what should or should not count as evidence of existence. I used Dr Johnson’s criterion. Consider again the point X on the screen in Figure 2.7 (p. 41), which is illuminated when only two slits are open but goes dark when two further slits are opened. I said that it is an ‘inescapable’ conclusion that *something* must be coming through the second pair of slits to prevent the light from the first pair from reaching X. It is not *logically* inescapable, for if we were not looking for explanations we could just say that the photons we see behave *as if* something passing through other slits had deflected them, but that in fact there is nothing there. Similarly, Dr Johnson could have said that his foot rebounded *as if* a rock had been there, but that in fact there was nothing there. The Inquisition did say that the planets were seen to move as if they and the Earth were in orbit round the Sun, but that in fact they moved round the fixed Earth. But if the object of the exercise is to explain the motion of planets, or the motion of photons, we must do as Dr Johnson did. We must adopt a methodological rule that if something behaves as if it existed, by kicking back, then one regards that as evidence that it does exist. Shadow photons kick back by interfering with the photons that we see, and therefore shadow photons exist.
Can we likewise conclude from Dr Johnson’s criterion that ‘planets move as if they were being pushed by angels; therefore angels exist’? No, but only because we have a better explanation. The angel theory of planetary motion is not *wholly* without merit. It does explain why planets move independently of the celestial sphere, and that does indeed make it superior to solipsism. But it  does not explain why the angels should push the planets along one set of orbits rather than another, or, in particular, why they should push them as if their motion were determined by a curvature of space and time, as specified in every detail by the universal laws of the general theory of relativity. That is why the angel theory cannot compete as an explanation with the theories of modern physics.
Similarly, to postulate that angels come through the other slits and deflect our photons would be better than nothing. But we can do better than that. We know exactly how those angels would have to behave: very much like photons. So we have a choice between an explanation in terms of invisible angels pretending to be photons, and one in terms of invisible photons. In the absence of an independent explanation for why angels should pretend to be photons, that latter explanation is superior.
We do not feel the presence of our counterparts in other universes. Nor did the Inquisition feel the Earth moving beneath their feet. And yet, it moves! Now, consider what it would feel like if we did exist in multiple copies, interacting only through the imperceptibly slight effects of quantum interference. This is the equivalent of what Galileo did when he analysed how the Earth would feel to us if it were moving in accordance with the heliocentric theory. He discovered that the motion would be imperceptible. Yet perhaps ‘imperceptible’ is not quite the right word here. Neither the motion of the Earth nor the presence of parallel universes is directly perceptible, but then neither is anything else (except perhaps, if Descartes’s argument holds, your own bare existence). But both things *are* perceptible in the sense that they perceptibly ‘kick back’ at us if we examine them through scientific instruments. We can see a Foucault pendulum swing in a plane that gradually seems to turn, revealing the rotation of the Earth beneath it. And we can detect photons that have been deflected by interference from their other-universe counterparts. It is only an accident of evolution, as it were, that the senses we are born with are not adapted to feel such things ‘directly’.
It is not how hard something kicks back that makes the theory  of its existence compelling. What matters is its role in the explanations that such a theory provides. I have given examples from physics where very tiny ‘kicks’ lead us to momentous conclusions about reality because we have no other explanation. The converse can also happen: if there is no clear-cut winner among the contending explanations, then even a very powerful ‘kick’ may not convince us that the supposed source has independent reality. For example, you may one day see terrifying monsters attacking you — and then wake up. If the explanation that they originated within your own mind seems adequate, it would be irrational for you to conclude that there really are such monsters out there. If you feel a sudden pain in your shoulder as you walk down a busy street, and look around, and see nothing to explain it, you may wonder whether the pain was caused by an unconscious part of your own mind, or by your body, or by something outside. You may consider it *possible* that a hidden prankster has shot you with an air-gun, yet come to no conclusion as to the reality of such a person. But if you then saw an air-gun pellet rolling away on the pavement, you might conclude that no explanation solved the problem as well as the air-gun explanation, in which case you would adopt it. In other words, you would tentatively infer the existence of a person you had not seen, and might never see, just because of that person’s role in the best explanation available to you. Clearly the theory of such a person’s existence is not a logical consequence of the observed evidence (which, incidentally, would consist of a single observation). Nor does that theory have the form of an ‘inductive generalization’, for example that you will observe the same thing again if you perform the same experiment. Nor is the theory experimentally testable: experiment could never prove the absence of a hidden prankster. Despite all that, the argument in favour of the theory could be overwhelmingly convincing, if it were the best explanation.
Whenever I have used Dr Johnson’s criterion to argue for the reality of something, one attribute in particular has always been relevant, namely *complexity*. We prefer simpler explanations to more complex ones. And we prefer explanations that are capable  of accounting for detail and complexity to explanations that can account only for simple aspects of phenomena. Dr Johnson’s criterion tells us to regard as real those complex entities which, if we did *not* regard them as real, would complicate our explanations. For instance, we must regard the planets as real, because if we did not we should be forced into complicated explanations of a cosmic planetarium, or of altered laws of physics, or of angels, or of whatever else would, under that assumption, be giving us the illusion that there are planets out there in space.
Thus the observed complexity in the structure or behaviour of an entity is part of the evidence that that entity is real. But it is not sufficient evidence. We do not, for example, deem our reflections in a mirror to be real people. Of course, illusions themselves are real physical processes. But the illusory entities they show us need not be considered real, because they derive their complexity from somewhere else. They are not *autonomously* complex. Why do we accept the ‘mirror’ theory of reflections, but reject the ‘planetarium’ theory of the solar system? It is because, given a simple explanation of the action of mirrors, we can understand that nothing of what we see in them genuinely lies behind them. No further explanation is needed because the reflections, though complex, are not autonomous — their complexity is merely borrowed from our side of the mirror. That is not so for planets. The theory that the cosmic planetarium is real, and that nothing lies beyond it, only makes the problem worse. For if we accepted it, then instead of asking only how the solar system works we should first have to ask how the planetarium works, and *then* how the solar system it is displaying works. We could not avoid the latter question, and it is effectively a repetition of what we were trying to answer in the first place. Now we can rephrase Dr Johnson’s criterion thus:
 
If, according to the simplest explanation, an entity is complex and autonomous, then that entity is real.
 
Computational *complexity theory* is the branch of computer science that is concerned with what resources (such as time, memory capacity or energy) are required to perform given classes  of computations. The complexity of a piece of information is defined in terms of the computational resources (such as the length of the program, the number of computational steps or the amount of memory) that a computer would need if it was to reproduce that piece of information. Several different definitions of complexity are in use, each with its own domain of applicability. The exact definitions need not concern us here, but they are all based on the idea that a complex process is one that in effect presents us with the results of a substantial computation. The sense in which the motion of the planets ‘presents us with the results of a substantial computation’ is well illustrated by a planetarium. Consider a planetarium controlled by a computer which calculates the exact image that the projectors should display to represent the night sky. To do this authentically, the computer has to use the formulae provided by astronomical theories; in fact the computation is identical to the one that it would perform if it were calculating predictions of where an observatory should point its telescopes to see real planets and stars. What we mean by saying that the appearance of the planetarium is ‘as complex’ as that of the night sky it depicts is that those two computations — one describing the night sky, the other describing the planetarium — are largely identical. So we can re-express Dr Johnson’s criterion again, in terms of hypothetical computations:
 
If a substantial amount of computation would be required to give us the illusion that a certain entity is real, then that entity is real.
 
If Dr Johnson’s leg invariably rebounded when he extended it, then the source of his illusions (God, a virtual-reality machine, or whatever) would need to perform only a simple computation to determine when to give him the rebounding sensation (something like ‘IF leg-is-extended THEN rebound. . .’). But to reproduce what Dr Johnson experienced in a realistic experiment it would be necessary to take into account where the rock is, and whether Dr Johnson’s foot is going to hit or miss it, and how heavy, how hard and how firmly lodged it is, and whether anyone else has just kicked it out of the way, and so on — a vast computation.
Physicists trying to cling to a single-universe world-view sometimes try to explain quantum interference phenomena as follows: ‘No shadow photons exist,’ they say, ‘and what carries the effect of the distant slits to the photon we see is — nothing. Some sort of action at a distance (as in Newton’s law of gravity) simply makes photons change course when a distant slit is opened.’ But there is nothing ‘simple’ about this supposed action at a distance. The appropriate physical law would have to say that a photon is affected by distant objects exactly *as if* something were passing through the distant gaps and bouncing off the distant mirrors so as to intercept that photon at the right time and place. Calculating how a photon reacts to these distant objects would require the same computational effort as working out the history of large numbers of shadow photons. The computation would have to work its way through a story of what each shadow photon does: it bounces off this, is stopped by that, and so on. Therefore, just as with Dr Johnson’s rock, and just as with Galileo’s planets, a story that is in effect about shadow photons necessarily appears in any explanation of the observed effects. The irreducible complexity of that story makes it philosophically untenable to deny that the objects exist.
The physicist David Bohm constructed a theory with predictions identical to those of quantum theory, in which a sort of wave accompanies every photon, washes over the entire barrier, passes through the slits and interferes with the photon that we see. Bohm’s theory is often presented as a single-universe variant of quantum theory. But according to Dr Johnson’s criterion, that is a mistake. Working out what Bohm’s invisible wave will do requires the same computations as working out what trillions of shadow photons will do. Some parts of the wave describe us, the observers, detecting and reacting to the photons; other parts of the wave describe other versions of us, reacting to photons in different positions. Bohm’s modest nomenclature — referring to most of reality as a ‘wave’ — does not change the fact that in his theory reality consists of large sets of complex entities, each of which can perceive other entities  in its own set, but can only indirectly perceive entities in other sets. These sets of entities are, in other words, parallel universes.
I have described Galileo’s new conception of our relationship with external reality as a great methodological discovery. It gave us a new, reliable form of reasoning involving observational evidence. That is indeed one aspect of his discovery: scientific reasoning is reliable, not in the sense that it certifies that any particular theory will survive unchanged, even until tomorrow, but in the sense that we are right to rely on it. For we are right to seek solutions to problems rather than sources of ultimate justification. Observational evidence is indeed evidence, not in the sense that any theory can be deduced, induced or in any other way inferred from it, but in the sense that it can constitute a genuine reason for preferring one theory to another.
But there is another side to Galileo’s discovery which is much less often appreciated. The reliability of scientific reasoning is not just an attribute of *us*: of *our* knowledge and *our* relationship with reality. It is also a new fact about physical reality itself, a fact which Galileo expressed in the phrase ‘the Book of Nature is written in mathematical symbols’. As I have said, it is impossible literally to ‘read’ any shred of a theory in nature: that is the inductivist mistake. But what is genuinely out there is evidence, or, more precisely, a reality that will respond with evidence if we interact appropriately with it. Given a shred of a theory, or rather, shreds of several rival theories, the evidence is available out there to enable us to distinguish between them. Anyone can search for it, find it and improve upon it if they take the trouble. They do not need authorization, or initiation, or holy texts. They need only be looking in the right way — with fertile problems and promising theories in mind. This open accessibility, not only of evidence but of the whole mechanism of knowledge acquisition, is a key attribute of Galileo’s conception of reality.
Galileo may have thought this self-evident, but it is not. It is a substantive assertion about what physical reality is like. Logically, reality need not have had this science-friendly property, but it does — and in abundance. Galileo’s universe is saturated with evidence.  Copernicus had assembled evidence for his heliocentric theory in Poland. Tycho Brahe had collected his evidence in Denmark, and Kepler had in Germany. And by pointing his telescope at the skies over Italy, Galileo gained greater access to the same evidence. Every part of the Earth’s surface, on every clear night, for billions of years, has been deluged with evidence about the facts and laws of astronomy. For many other sciences evidence has similarly been on display, to be viewed more clearly in modern times by microscopes and other instruments. Where evidence is not already physically present, we can bring it into existence with devices such as lasers and pierced barriers — devices which it is open to anyone, anywhere and at any time, to build. And the evidence will be the same, regardless of who reveals it. The more fundamental a theory is, the more readily available is the evidence that bears upon it (to those who know how to look), not just on Earth but throughout the multiverse.
Thus physical reality is *self-similar* on several levels: among the stupendous complexities of the universe and multiverse, some patterns are nevertheless endlessly repeated. Earth and Jupiter are in many ways dramatically dissimilar planets, but they both move in ellipses, and they are made of the same set of a hundred or so chemical elements (albeit in different proportions), and so are their parallel-universe counterparts. The evidence that so impressed Galileo and his contemporaries also exists on other planets and in distant galaxies. The evidence being considered at this moment by physicists and astronomers would also have been available a billion years ago, and will still be available a billion years hence. The very existence of general, explanatory theories implies that disparate objects and events are physically alike in some ways. The light reaching us from distant galaxies is, after all, only light, but it looks to us like galaxies. Thus reality contains not only evidence, but also the means (such as our minds, and our artefacts) of understanding it. There *are* mathematical symbols in physical reality. The fact that it is we who put them there does not make them any less physical. In those symbols — in our planetariums, books, films and computer memories, and in our brains — there are images of  physical reality at large, images not just of the appearance of objects, but of the structure of reality. There are laws and explanations, reductive and emergent. There are descriptions and explanations of the Big Bang and of subnuclear particles and processes; there are mathematical abstractions; fiction; art; morality; shadow photons; parallel universes. To the extent that these symbols, images and theories are true — that is, they resemble in appropriate respects the concrete or abstract things they refer to — their existence gives reality a new sort of self-similarity, the self-similarity we call knowledge.
