# 5 - Virtual Reality

**5**
**Virtual Reality**
The theory of computation has traditionally been studied almost entirely in the abstract, as a topic in pure mathematics. This is to miss the point of it. Computers are physical objects, and computations are physical processes. What computers can or cannot compute is determined by the laws of physics alone, and not by pure mathematics. One of the most important concepts of the theory of computation is *universality. A universal computer* is usually defined as an abstract machine that can mimic the computations of any other abstract machine in a certain well-defined class. However, the significance of universality lies in the fact that universal computers, or at least good approximations to them, can actually be built, and can be used to compute not just each other’s behaviour but the behaviour of interesting physical and abstract entities. The fact that this is possible is part of the self-similarity of physical reality that I mentioned in the previous chapter.
The best-known physical manifestation of universality is an area of technology that has been mooted for decades but is only now beginning to take off, namely *virtual reality*. The term refers to any situation in which a person is artificially given the experience of being in a specified environment. For example, a flight simulator - a machine that gives pilots the experience of flying an aircraft without their having to leave the ground — is a type of virtual-reality generator. Such a machine (or more precisely, the computer that controls it) can be programmed with the characteristics of a real or imaginary aircraft. The aircraft’s environment, such as the weather and the layout of airports, can also be specified in the  program. As the pilot practises flying from one airport to another, the simulator causes the appropriate images to appear at the windows, the appropriate jolts and accelerations to be felt, the corresponding readings to be shown on the instruments, and so on. It can incorporate the effects of, for example, turbulence, mechanical failure and proposed modifications to the aircraft. Thus a flight simulator can give the user a wide range of piloting experiences, including some that no real aircraft could: the simulated aircraft could have performance characteristics that violate the laws of physics: it could, for instance, fly through mountains, faster than light or without fuel.
Since we experience our environment through our senses, any virtual-reality generator must be able to manipulate our senses, overriding their normal functioning so that we can experience the specified environment instead of our actual one. This may sound like something out of Aldous Huxley’s *Brave New World*, but of course technologies for the artificial control of human sensory experience have been evolving for thousands of years. All techniques of representational art and long-distance communication may be thought of as ‘overriding the normal functioning of the senses’. Even prehistoric cave paintings gave the viewer something of the experience of seeing animals that were not actually there. Today we can do that much more accurately, using movies and sound recordings, though still not accurately enough for the simulated environment to be mistaken for the original.
I shall use the term *image generator* for any device, such as a planetarium, a hi-fi system or a spice rack, which can generate specifiable sensory input for the user: specified pictures, sounds, odours, and so on all count as ‘images’. For example, to generate the olfactory image (i.e. the smell) of vanilla, one opens the vanilla bottle from the spice rack. To generate the auditory image (i.e. the sound) of Mozart’s 20th piano concerto, one plays the corresponding compact disc on the hi-fi system. Any image generator is a rudimentary sort of virtual-reality generator, but the term ‘virtual reality’ is usually reserved for cases where there is both a wide coverage of the user’s sensory range, and a substantial element of  interaction (‘kicking back’) between the user and the simulated entities.
Present-day video games do allow interaction between the player and the game objects, but usually only a small fraction of the user’s sensory range is covered. The rendered ‘environment’ consists of images on a small screen, and a proportion of the sounds that the user hears. But virtual-reality video games more worthy of the term do already exist. Typically, the user wears a helmet with built-in headphones and two television screens, one for each eye, and perhaps special gloves and other clothing lined with electrically controlled effectors (pressure-generating devices). There are also sensors that detect the motion of parts of the user’s body, especially the head. The information about what the user is doing is passed to a computer, which calculates what the user should be seeing, hearing and feeling, and responds by sending appropriate signals to the image generators (Figure 5.1). When the user looks to the left or right, the pictures on the two television screens pan, just as a real field of view would, to show whatever is on the user’s left or right in the simulated world. The user can reach out and pick up a simulated object, and it feels real because the effectors in the glove generate the ‘tactile feedback’ appropriate to whatever position and orientation the object is seen in.
Game-playing and vehicle simulation are the main uses of virtual reality at present, but a plethora of new uses is envisaged for the near future. It will soon be commonplace for architects to create virtual-reality prototypes of buildings in which clients can walk around and try out modifications at a stage when they can be implemented relatively effortlessly. Shoppers will be able to walk (or indeed fly) around in virtual-reality supermarkets without ever leaving home, and without ever encountering crowds of other shoppers or listening to music they don’t like. Nor will they necessarily be alone in the simulated supermarket, for any number of people can go shopping together in virtual reality, each being provided with images of the others as well as of the supermarket, without any of them having to leave home. Concerts and conferences will be held without venues; not only will there be savings on the cost of the auditorium, and on accommodation and travel, but there is also the benefit that all the participants could be allowed to sit in the best seats simultaneously.
[Image: 015]
**FIGURE 5.1** *Virtual reality as it is implemented today.*
 
If Bishop Berkeley or the Inquisition had known of virtual reality, they would probably have seized upon it as the perfect illustration of the deceitfulness of the senses, backing up their arguments against scientific reasoning. What would happen if the pilot of a flight simulator tried to use Dr Johnson’s test for reality? Although the simulated aircraft and its surroundings do not really exist, they do ‘kick back’ at the pilot just as they would if they did exist. The pilot can open the throttle and hear the engines roar in response, and feel their thrust through the seat, and see them through the window, vibrating and blasting out hot gas, in spite of the fact that there are no engines there at all. The pilot may experience flying the aircraft through a storm, and hear the thunder and see the rain driving against the windscreen, though none of those things is there in reality. What is outside the cockpit in reality is just a computer, some hydraulic jacks, television screens and loudspeakers, and a perfectly dry and stationary room.
Does this invalidate Dr Johnson’s refutation of solipsism? No. His conversation with Boswell could just as well have taken place inside a flight simulator. ‘I refute it *thus*’, he might have said, opening the throttle and feeling the simulated engine kick back. There is no engine there. What kicks back is ultimately a computer,  running a program that calculates what an engine would do if it were ‘kicked’. But those calculations, which are external to Dr Johnson’s mind, respond to the throttle control in the same complex and autonomous way as the engine would. Therefore they pass the test for reality, and rightly so, for in fact these calculations are physical processes within the computer, and the computer is an ordinary physical object — no less so than an engine — and perfectly real. The fact that it is not a real *engine* is irrelevant to the argument against solipsism. After all, not everything that is real has to be easy to identify. It would not have mattered, in Dr Johnson’s original demonstration, if what seemed to be a rock had later turned out to be an animal with a rock-like camouflage, or a holographic projection disguising a garden gnome. So long as its response was complex and autonomous, Dr Johnson would have been right to conclude that it was caused by something real, outside himself, and therefore that reality did not consist of himself alone.
Nevertheless, the feasibility of virtual reality may seem an uncomfortable fact for those of us whose world-view is based on science. Just think what a virtual-reality generator is, from the point of view of physics. It is of course a physical object, obeying the same laws of physics as all other objects do. But it can ‘pretend’ otherwise. It can pretend to be a completely different object, obeying false laws of physics. Moreover, it can pretend this in a complex and autonomous way. When the user kicks it to test the reality of what it purports to be, it kicks back as if it really were that other, non-existent object, and as if the false laws were true. If we had only such objects to learn physics from, we would learn the wrong laws. (Or would we? Surprisingly, things are not as straightforward as that. I shall return to this question in the next chapter, but first we must consider the phenomenon of virtual reality more carefully.)
On the face of it, Bishop Berkeley would seem to have a point, that virtual reality is a token of the coarseness of human faculties - that its feasibility should warn us of inherent limitations on the capacity of human beings to understand the physical world. Virtual-reality rendering might seem to fall into the same philosophical category as illusions, false trails and coincidences, for these  too are phenomena which seem to show us something real but actually mislead us. We have seen that the scientific world-view can accommodate — indeed, expects — the existence of highly misleading phenomena. It is *par excellence* the world-view that can accommodate both human fallibility and external sources of error. Nevertheless, misleading phenomena are basically unwelcome. Except for their curiosity value, or when we learn from them why we are misled, they are things we try to avoid and would rather do without. But virtual reality is not in that category. We shall see that the existence of virtual reality does not indicate that the human capacity to understand the world is inherently limited, but, on the contrary, that it is inherently unlimited. It is no anomaly brought about by the accidental properties of human sense organs, but is a fundamental property of the multiverse at large. And the fact that the multiverse has this property, far from being a minor embarrassment for realism and science, is essential for both — it is the very property that makes science possible. It is not something that ‘we would rather do without’; it is something that we literally could not do without.
These may seem rather lofty claims to make on behalf of flight simulators and video games. But it is the phenomenon of virtual reality in general that occupies a central place in the scheme of things, not any particular virtual-reality generator. So I want to consider virtual reality in as general a way as possible. What, if any, are its ultimate limits? What sorts of environment can in principle be artificially rendered, and with what accuracy? By ‘in principle’ I mean ignoring transient limitations of technology, but taking into account all limitations that may be imposed by the principles of logic and physics.
The way I have defined it, a virtual-reality generator is a machine that gives the user experiences of some real or imagined environment (such as an aircraft) which is, or seems to be, outside the user’s mind. Let me call those *external experiences*. External experiences are to be contrasted with *internal experiences* such as one’s nervousness when making one’s first solo landing, or one’s surprise at the sudden appearance of a thunderstorm out of a clear blue  sky. A virtual-reality generator indirectly causes the user to have internal experiences as well as external ones, but it cannot be programmed to render a specific internal experience. For example, a pilot who makes roughly the same flight twice in the simulator will have roughly the same external experiences on both occasions, but on the second occasion will probably be less surprised when the thunderstorm appears. Of course on the second occasion the pilot would probably also react differently to the appearance of the thunderstorm, and that would make the subsequent external experiences different too. But the point is that although one can program the machine to make a thunderstorm appear in the pilot’s field of view whenever one likes, one cannot program it to make the pilot think whatever one likes in response.
One can conceive of a technology beyond virtual reality, which could also induce specified *internal* experiences. A few internal experiences, such as moods induced by certain drugs, can already be artificially rendered, and no doubt in future it will be possible to extend that repertoire. But a generator of specifiable internal experiences would in general have to be able to override the normal functioning of the user’s mind as well as the senses. In other words, it would be replacing the user by a different person. This puts such machines into a different category from virtual-reality generators. They will require quite different technology and will raise quite different philosophical issues, which is why I have excluded them from my definition of virtual reality.
Another type of experience which certainly cannot be artificially rendered is a *logically impossible* one. I have said that a flight simulator can create the experience of a physically impossible flight through a mountain. But nothing can create the experience of factorizing the number 181, because that is logically impossible: 181 is a prime number. (*Believing* that one has factorized 181 is a logically possible experience, but an internal one, and so also outside the scope of virtual reality.) Another logically impossible experience is unconsciousness, for when one is unconscious one is by definition not experiencing anything. Not experiencing anything is quite different from experiencing a total lack of sensations — sensory  isolation — which is of course a physically possible environment.
Having excluded logically impossible experiences and internal experiences, we are left with the vast class of *logically possible, external experiences* — experiences of environments which are logically possible, but may or may not be physically possible (Table 5.1). Something is physically possible if it is not forbidden by the laws of physics. In this book I shall assume that the ‘laws of physics’ include an as yet unknown rule determining the initial state or other supplementary data necessary to give, in principle, a complete description of the multiverse (otherwise these data would be a set of intrinsically inexplicable facts). In that case, an environment is physically possible if and only if it actually exists somewhere in the multiverse (i.e. in some universe or universes). Something is physically impossible if it does not happen anywhere in the multiverse.
I define the *repertoire* of a virtual-reality generator as the set of real or imaginary environments that the generator can be programmed to give the user the experience of. My question about the ultimate limits of virtual reality can be stated like this: what constraints, if any, do the laws of physics impose on the repertoires of virtual-reality generators?
Virtual reality always involves the creation of artificial sense-impressions — image generation — so let us begin there. What constraints do the laws of physics impose on the ability of image generators to create artificial images, to render detail and to cover their respective sensory ranges? There are obvious ways in which the detail rendered by a present-day flight simulator could be improved, for example by using higher-definition televisions. But can a realistic aircraft and its surroundings be rendered, even in principle, with the ultimate level of detail — that is, with the greatest level of detail the pilot’s senses can resolve? For the sense of hearing, that ultimate level has almost been achieved in hi-fi systems, and for sight it is within reach. But what about the other senses? Is it obvious that it is physically possible to build a general-purpose chemical factory that can produce any specified combination of millions of different odoriferous chemicals at a moment’s notice? Or a machine which, when inserted into a gourmet’s mouth, can assume the taste and texture of any possible dish — to say nothing of creating the hunger and thirst that precede the meal and the physical satisfaction that follows it? (Hunger and thirst, and other sensations such as balance and muscle tension, are perceived as being internal to the body, but they are external to the mind and are therefore potentially within the scope of virtual reality.)
[Image: 016]
**TABLE 5.1** *A classification of experiences, with examples of each. Virtual reality is concerned with the generation of logically possible, external experiences (top-left region of the table*).
 
The difficulty of making such machines may be merely technological, but what about this: suppose that the pilot of a flight simulator aims the simulated aircraft vertically upwards at high speed and then switches off the engines. The aircraft should continue to rise until its upward momentum is exhausted, and then begin to fall back with increasing speed. The whole motion is called *free fall*, even though the aircraft is travelling upwards at first, because it is moving under the influence of gravity alone. When an aircraft is in free fall its occupants are weightless and can float around the cabin like astronauts in orbit. Weight is restored only when an upward force is again exerted on the aircraft, as it soon must be, either by aerodynamics or by the unforgiving ground. (In practice free fall is usually achieved by flying the aircraft under power in the same parabolic trajectory that it would follow in the absence of both engine force and air resistance.) Free-falling aircraft are used to give astronauts weightlessness training before they go  into space. A real aircraft could be in free fall for a couple of minutes or more, because it has several kilometres in which to go up and down. But a flight simulator on the ground can be in free fall only for a moment, while its supports let it ride up to their maximum extension and then drop back. Flight simulators (present-day ones, at least) cannot be used for weightlessness training: one needs real aircraft.
Could one remedy this deficiency in flight simulators by giving them the capacity to simulate free fall on the ground (in which case they could also be used as *space*flight simulators)? Not easily, for the laws of physics get in the way. Known physics provides no way other than free fall, even in principle, of removing an object’s weight. The only way of putting a flight simulator into free fall while it remained stationary on the surface of the Earth would be somehow to suspend a massive body, such as another planet of similar mass, or a black hole, above it. Even if this were possible (remember, we are concerned here not with immediate practicality, but with what the laws of physics do or do not permit), a real aircraft could also produce frequent, complex changes in the magnitude and direction of the occupants’ weight by manoeuvring or by switching its engines on and off. To simulate these changes, the massive body would have to be moved around just as frequently, and it seems likely that the speed of light (if nothing else) would impose an absolute limit on how fast this could be done.
However, to simulate free fall a flight simulator would not have to provide real weightlessness, only the experience of weightlessness, and various techniques which do not involve free fall have been used to approximate that. For example, astronauts train under water in spacesuits that are weighted so as to have zero buoyancy. Another technique is to use a harness that carries the astronaut through the air under computer control to mimic weightlessness. But these methods are crude, and the sensations they produce could hardly be mistaken for the real thing, let alone be indistinguishable from it. One is inevitably supported by forces on one’s skin, which one cannot help feeling. Also, the characteristic sensation of falling, experienced through the sense organs in the inner ear, is not  rendered at all. One can imagine further improvements: the use of supporting fluids with very low viscosity; drugs that create the sensation of falling. But could one ever render the experience perfectly, in a flight simulator that remained firmly on the ground? If not, then there would be an absolute limit on the fidelity with which flying experiences can ever be rendered artificially. To distinguish between a real aircraft and a simulation, a pilot would only have to fly it in a free-fall trajectory and see whether weightlessness occurred or not.
Stated generally, the problem is this. To override the normal functioning of the sense organs, we must send them images resembling those that would be produced by the environment being simulated. We must also intercept and suppress the images produced by the user’s actual environment. But these image manipulations are physical operations, and can be performed only by processes available in the real physical world. Light and sound can be physically absorbed and replaced fairly easily. But as I have said, that is not true of gravity: the laws of physics do not happen to permit it. The example of weightlessness seems to suggest that accurate simulation of a weightless environment by a machine that was not actually in flight might violate the laws of physics.
But that is not so. Weightlessness and all other sensations can, in principle, be rendered artificially. Eventually it will become possible to bypass the sense organs altogether and directly stimulate the nerves that lead from them to the brain.
So, we do not need general-purpose chemical factories or impossible artificial-gravity machines. When we have understood the olfactory organs well enough to crack the code in which they send signals to the brain when they detect scents, a computer with suitable connections to the relevant nerves could send the brain the same signals. Then the brain could experience the scents without the corresponding chemicals ever having existed. Similarly, the brain could experience the authentic sensation of weightlessness even under normal gravity. And of course, no televisions or headphones would be needed either.
Thus the laws of physics impose no limit on the range and  accuracy of image generators. There is no possible sensation, or sequence of sensations, that human beings are capable of experiencing that could not in principle be rendered artificially. One day, as a generalization of movies, there will be what Aldous Huxley in *Brave New World* called ‘feelies’ — movies for all the senses. One will be able to feel the rocking of a boat beneath one’s feet, hear the waves and smell the sea, see the changing colours of the sunset on the horizon and feel the wind in one’s hair (whether or not one has any hair) — all without leaving dry land or venturing out of doors. Not only that, feelies will just as easily be able to depict scenes that have never existed, and never could exist. Or they could play the equivalent of music: beautiful abstract combinations of sensations composed to delight the senses.
That every possible sensation can be artificially rendered is one thing; that it will one day be possible, once and for all, to build a single machine that can render any possible sensation calls for something extra: universality. A feelie machine with that capability would be a *universal image generator.*
The possibility of a universal image generator forces us to change our perspective on the question of the ultimate limits of feelie technology. At present, progress in such technology is all about inventing more diverse and more accurate ways of stimulating sense organs. But that class of problems will disappear once we have cracked the codes used by our sense organs, and developed a sufficiently delicate technique for stimulating nerves. Once we can artificially generate nerve signals accurately enough for the brain not to be able to perceive the difference between those signals and the ones that our sense organs would send, increasing the accuracy of this technique will no longer be relevant. At that point the technology will have come of age, and the challenge for further improvement will be not how to render given sensations, but which sensations to render. In a limited domain this is happening today, as the problem of how to get the highest possible fidelity of sound reproduction has come close to being solved with the compact disc and the present generation of sound-reproduction equipment. Soon there will no longer be such a thing as a hi-fi enthusiast. Enthusiasts  for sound reproduction will no longer be concerned with how accurate the reproduction is — it will routinely be accurate to the limit of human discrimination — but only with what sounds should be recorded in the first place.
If an image generator is playing a recording taken from life, its *accuracy* may be defined as the closeness of the rendered images to the ones that a person in the original situation would have perceived. More generally, if the generator is rendering artificially designed images, such as a cartoon, or music played from a written composition, the accuracy is the closeness of the rendered images to the intended ones. By ‘closeness’ we mean closeness as perceived by the user. If the rendering is so close as to be indistinguishable by the user from what is intended, then we can call it *perfectly accurate*. (So a rendering that is perfectly accurate for one user may contain inaccuracies that are perceptible to a user with sharper senses, or with additional senses.)
A universal image generator does not of course contain recordings of all possible images. What makes it universal is that, given a recording of any possible image, it can evoke the corresponding sensation in the user. With a universal auditory sensation generator - the ultimate hi-fi system — the recording might be given in the form of a compact disc. To accommodate auditory sensations that last longer than the disc’s storage capacity allows, we must incorporate a mechanism that can feed any number of discs consecutively into the machine. The same proviso holds for all other universal image generators, for strictly speaking an image generator is not universal unless it includes a mechanism for playing recordings of unlimited duration. Furthermore, when the machine has been playing for a long time it will require maintenance, otherwise the images it generates will become degraded or may cease altogether. These and similar considerations are all connected with the fact that considering a single physical object in isolation from the rest of the universe is always an approximation. A universal image generator is universal only in a certain external context, in which it is assumed to be provided with such things as an energy supply, a cooling mechanism and periodic maintenance. That a machine has such  external needs does not disqualify it from being regarded as a ‘single, universal machine’ provided that the laws of physics do not forbid these needs from being met, and provided that meeting those needs does not necessitate changing the machine’s design.
Now, as I have said, image generation is only one component of virtual reality: there is the all-important interactive element as well. A virtual-reality generator can be thought of as an image generator whose images are not wholly specified in advance but depend partly on what the user chooses to do. It does not play its user a predetermined sequence of images, as a movie or a feelie would. It composes the images as it goes along, taking into account a continuous stream of information about what the user is doing. Present-day virtual-reality generators, for instance, keep track of the position of the user’s head, using motion sensors as shown in Figure 5.1. Ultimately they will have to keep track of everything the user does that could affect the subjective appearance of the simulated environment. The environment may include the user’s own body: since the body is external to the mind, the specification of a virtual-reality environment may legitimately include the requirement that the user’s body should seem to have been replaced by a new one with specified properties.
The human mind affects the body and the outside world by emitting nerve impulses. Therefore a virtual-reality generator can in principle obtain all the information it needs about what the user is doing by intercepting the nerve signals coming from the user’s brain. Those signals, which would have gone to the user’s body, can instead be transmitted to a computer and decoded to determine exactly how the user’s body would have moved. The signals sent back to the brain by the computer can be the same as those that would have been sent by the body if it were in the specified environment. If the specification called for it, the simulated body could also react differently from the real one, for example to enable it to survive in simulations of environments that would kill a real human body, or to simulate malfunctions of the body.
I had better admit here that it is probably too great an idealization to say that the human mind interacts with the outside world  *only* by emitting and receiving nerve impulses. There are chemical messages passing in both directions as well. I am assuming that in principle those messages could also be intercepted and replaced at some point between the brain and the rest of the body. Thus the user would lie motionless, connected to the computer, but having the experience of interacting fully with a simulated world - in effect, living there. Figure 5.2 illustrates what I am envisaging. Incidentally, though such technology lies well in the future, the idea for it is much older than the theory of computation itself. In the early seventeenth century Descartes was already considering the philosophical implications of a sense-manipulating ‘demon’ that was essentially a virtual-reality generator of the type shown in Figure 5.2, with a supernatural mind replacing the computer.
From the foregoing discussion it seems that any virtual-reality generator must have at least three principal components:a set of sensors (which may be nerve-impulse detectors) to detect what the user is doing,
a set of image generators (which may be nerve-stimulation devices), and
 
a computer in control.

My account so far has concentrated on the first two of these, the sensors and the image generators. That is because, at the present primitive state of the technology, virtual-reality research is still preoccupied with image generation. But when we look beyond transient technological limitations, we see that image generators merely provide the interface — the ‘connecting cable’ — between the user and the true virtual-reality generator, which is the computer. For it is entirely within the computer that the specified environment is simulated. It is the computer that provides the complex and autonomous ‘kicking back’ that justifies the word ‘reality’ in ‘virtual reality’. The connecting cable contributes nothing to the user’s perceived environment, being from the user’s point of view ‘transparent’, just as we naturally do not perceive our own nerves as being part of our environment. Thus virtual-reality generators of the future would be better described as having only one principal component, a computer, together with some trivial peripheral devices.
[Image: 017]
**FIGURE 5.2** *Virtual reality as it might be implemented in the future.*
 
I do not want to understate the practical problems involved in intercepting all the nerve signals passing into and out of the human brain, and in cracking the various codes involved. But this is a finite set of problems that we shall have to solve once only. After that, the focus of virtual-reality technology will shift once and for all to the computer, to the problem of programming it to render various environments. What environments we shall be able to render will no longer depend on what sensors and image generators we can build, but on what environments we can specify. ‘Specifying’ an environment will mean supplying a program for the computer, which is the heart of the virtual-reality generator.
Because of the interactive nature of virtual reality, the concept of an accurate rendering is not as straightforward for virtual reality as it is for image generation. As I have said, the accuracy of an image generator is a measure of the closeness of the rendered images to the intended ones. But in virtual reality there are usually no particular *images* intended: what is intended is a certain environment for the user to experience. Specifying a virtual-reality environment does not mean specifying what the user will experience, but rather specifying how the environment would respond to each of the user’s possible actions. For example, in a simulated tennis game  one may specify in advance the appearance of the court, the weather, the demeanour of the audience and how well the opponent should play. But one does not specify how the game will go: that depends on the stream of decisions the user makes during the game. Each set of decisions will result in different responses from the simulated environment, and therefore in a different tennis game.
The number of possible tennis games that can be played in a single environment — that is, rendered by a single program — is very large. Consider a rendering of the Centre Court at Wimbledon from the point of view of a player. Suppose, very conservatively, that in each second of the game the player can move in one of two perceptibly different ways (perceptibly, that is, to the player). Then after two seconds there are four possible games, after three seconds, eight possible games, and so on. After about four minutes the number of possible games that are perceptibly different from one another exceeds the number of atoms in the universe, and it continues to rise exponentially. For a program to render that one environment accurately, it must be capable of responding in any one of those myriad, perceptibly different ways, depending on how the player chooses to behave. If two programs respond in the same way to every possible action by the user, then they render the same environment; if they would respond perceptibly differently to even one possible action, they render different environments.
That remains so even if the user never happens to perform the action that shows up the difference. The environment a program renders (for a given type of user, with a given connecting cable) is a logical property of the program, independent of whether the program is ever executed. A rendered environment is accurate in so far as it *would* respond in the intended way to every possible action of the user. Thus its accuracy depends not only on experiences which users of it actually have, but also on experiences they do not have, but would have had if they had chosen to behave differently during the rendering. This may sound paradoxical, but as I have said, it is a straightforward consequence of the fact that virtual reality is, like reality itself, interactive.
This gives rise to an important difference between image  generation and virtual-reality generation. The accuracy of an image generator’s rendering can in principle be experienced, measured and certified by the user, but the accuracy of a virtual-reality rendering never can be. For example, if you are a music-lover and know a particular piece well enough, you can listen to a performance of it and confirm that it is a perfectly accurate rendering, in principle down to the last note, phrasing, dynamics and all. But if you are a tennis fan who knows Wimbledon’s Centre Court perfectly, you can never confirm that a purported rendering of it is accurate. Even if you are free to explore the rendered Centre Court for however long you like, and to ‘kick’ it in whatever way you like, and even if you have equal access to the real Centre Court for comparison, you cannot ever certify that the program does indeed render the real location. For you can never know what would have happened if only you had explored a little more, or looked over your shoulder at the right moment. Perhaps if you had sat on the rendered umpire’s chair and shouted ‘fault!’, a nuclear submarine would have surfaced through the grass and torpedoed the scoreboard.
On the other hand, if you find even one difference between the rendering and the intended environment, you can immediately certify that the rendering is *in*accurate. Unless, that is, the rendered environment has some intentionally unpredictable features. For example, a roulette wheel is designed to be unpredictable. If we make a film of roulette being played in a casino, that film may be said to be accurate if the numbers that are shown coming up in the film are the same numbers that actually came up when the film was made. The film will show the same numbers every time it is played: it is totally predictable. So an accurate *image* of an unpredictable environment must be predictable. But what does it mean for a virtual-reality *rendering* of a roulette wheel to be accurate? As before, it means that a user should not find it perceptibly different from the original. But this implies that the rendering must *not* behave identically to the original: if it did, either it or the original could be used to predict the other’s behaviour, and then neither would be unpredictable. Nor must it behave in the same way every time it is run. A perfectly rendered roulette  wheel must be just as usable for gambling as a real one. Therefore it must be just as unpredictable. Also, it must be just as fair; that is, all the numbers must come up purely randomly, with equal probabilities.
How do we recognize unpredictable environments, and how do we confirm that purportedly random numbers are distributed fairly? We check whether a rendering of a roulette wheel meets its specifications in the same way that we check whether the real thing does: by kicking (spinning) it, and seeing whether it responds as advertised. We make a large number of similar observations and perform statistical tests on the outcomes. Again, however many tests we carry out, we cannot certify that the rendering is accurate, or even that it is probably accurate. For however randomly the numbers seem to come up, they may nevertheless fall into a secret pattern that would allow a user in the know to predict them. Or perhaps if we had asked out loud the date of the battle of Waterloo, the next two numbers that came up would invariably show that date: 18, 15. On the other hand, if the sequence that comes up looks unfair, we cannot know for sure that it is, but we might be able to say that the rendering is *probably* inaccurate. For example, if zero came up on our rendered roulette wheel on ten consecutive spins, we should conclude that we probably do not have an accurate rendering of a fair roulette wheel.
When discussing image generators, I said that the accuracy of a rendered image depends on the sharpness and other attributes of the user’s senses. With virtual reality that is the least of our problems. Certainly, a virtual-reality generator that renders a given environment perfectly for humans will not do so for dolphins or extraterrestrials. To render a given environment for a user with given types of sense organs, a virtual-reality generator must be physically adapted to such sense organs and its computer must be programmed with their characteristics. However, the modifications that have to be made to accommodate a given species of user are finite, and need only be carried out once. They amount to what I have called constructing a new ‘connecting cable’. As we consider environments of ever greater complexity, the task of rendering environments for  a given type of user becomes dominated by writing the programs for calculating what those environments will do; the species-specific part of the task, being of fixed complexity, becomes negligible by comparison. This discussion is about the ultimate limits of virtual reality, so we are considering arbitrarily accurate, long and complex renderings. That is why it makes sense to speak of ‘rendering a given environment’ without specifying who it is being rendered for.
We have seen that there is a well-defined notion of the accuracy of a virtual-reality rendering: accuracy is the closeness, as far as is perceptible, of the rendered environment to the intended one. But it must be close for every possible way in which the user might behave, and that is why, no matter how observant one is when experiencing a rendered environment, one cannot certify that it is accurate (or probably accurate). But experience can sometimes show that a rendering is inaccurate (or probably inaccurate).
This discussion of accuracy in virtual reality mirrors the relationship between theory and experiment in science. There too, it is possible to confirm experimentally that a general theory is false, but never that it is true. And there too, a short-sighted view of science is that it is all about predicting our sense-impressions. The correct view is that, while sense-impressions always play a role, what science is about is understanding the whole of reality, of which only an infinitesimal proportion is ever experienced.
The program in a virtual-reality generator embodies a general, predictive theory of the behaviour of the rendered environment. The other components deal with keeping track of what the user is doing and with the encoding and decoding of sensory data; these, as I have said, are relatively trivial functions. Thus if the environment is physically possible, rendering it is essentially equivalent to finding rules for predicting the outcome of every experiment that could be performed in that environment. Because of the way in which scientific knowledge is created, ever more accurate predictive rules can be discovered only through ever better explanatory theories. So accurately rendering a physically possible environment depends on understanding its physics.
The converse is also true: discovering the physics of an environment depends on creating a virtual-reality rendering of it. Normally one would say that scientific theories only describe and explain physical objects and processes, but do not render them. For example, an explanation of eclipses of the Sun can be printed in a book. A computer can be programmed with astronomical data and physical laws to predict an eclipse, and to print out a description of it. But rendering the eclipse in virtual reality would require both further programming and further hardware. However, those are already present in our brains! The words and numbers printed by the computer amount to ‘descriptions’ of an eclipse only because someone knows the meanings of those symbols. That is, the symbols evoke in the reader’s mind some sort of likeness of some predicted effect of the eclipse, against which the real appearance of that effect will be tested. Moreover, the ‘likeness’ that is evoked is interactive. One can observe an eclipse in many ways: with the naked eye, or by photography, or using various scientific instruments; from some positions on Earth one will see a total eclipse of the Sun, from other positions a partial eclipse, and from anywhere else no eclipse at all. In each case an observer will experience different images, any of which can be predicted by the theory. What the computer’s description evokes in a reader’s mind is not just a single image or sequence of images, but a general method of creating many different images, corresponding to the many ways in which the reader may contemplate making observations. In other words, it is a virtual-reality rendering. Thus, in a broad enough sense, taking into account the processes that must take place inside the scientist’s mind, science and the virtual-reality rendering of physically possible environments are two terms denoting the same activity.
Now, what about the rendering of environments that are not physically possible? On the face of it, there are two distinct types of virtual-reality rendering: a minority that depict physically possible environments, and a majority that depict physically impossible environments. But can this distinction survive closer examination? Consider a virtual-reality generator in the act of rendering a physically impossible environment. It might be a flight simulator, running  a program that calculates the view from the cockpit of an aircraft that can fly faster than light. The flight simulator is *rendering* that environment. But in addition the flight simulator is itself the environment that the user is experiencing, in the sense that it is a physical object surrounding the user. Let us consider this environment. Clearly it is a physically possible environment. Is it a renderable environment? Of course. In fact it is exceptionally easy to render: one simply uses a second flight simulator of the same design, running the identical program. Under those circumstances the second flight simulator can be thought of as rendering either the physically impossible aircraft, or a physically possible environment, namely the first flight simulator. Similarly, the first flight simulator could be regarded as rendering a physically possible environment, namely the second flight simulator. If we assume that any virtual-reality generator that can in principle be built, can in principle be built again, then it follows that every virtual-reality generator, running any program in its repertoire, is rendering *some* physically possible environment. It may be rendering other things as well, including physically impossible environments, but in particular there is always some physically possible environment that it is rendering.
So, which physically impossible environments can be rendered in virtual reality? Precisely those that are not perceptibly different from physically possible environments. Therefore the connection between the physical world and the worlds that are renderable in virtual reality is far closer than it looks. We think of some virtual-reality renderings as depicting fact, and others as depicting fiction, but the fiction is always an interpretation in the mind of the beholder. There is no such thing as a virtual-reality environment that the user would be compelled to interpret as physically impossible.
We might choose to render an environment as predicted by some ‘laws of physics’ that are different from the true laws of physics. We may do this as an exercise, or for fun, or as an approximation because the true rendering is too difficult or expensive. If the laws we are using are as close as we can make them to real ones, given  the constraints under which we are operating, we may call these renderings ‘applied mathematics’ or ‘computing’. If the rendered objects are very different from physically possible ones, we may call the rendering ‘pure mathematics’. If a physically impossible environment is rendered for fun, we call it a ‘video game’ or ‘computer art’. All these are interpretations. They may be useful interpretations, or even essential in explaining our motives in composing a particular rendering. But as far as the rendering itself goes there is always an alternative interpretation, namely that it accurately depicts some physically possible environment.
It is not customary to think of mathematics as being a form of virtual reality. We usually think of mathematics as being about abstract entities, such as numbers and sets, which do not affect the senses; and it might therefore seem that there can be no question of artificially rendering their effect on us. However, although mathematical entities do not affect the senses, the experience of doing mathematics is an external experience, no less than the experience of doing physics is. We make marks on pieces of paper and look at them, or we imagine looking at such marks — indeed, we cannot do mathematics without imagining abstract mathematical entities. But this means imagining an environment whose ‘physics’ embodies the complex and autonomous properties of those entities. For example, when we imagine the abstract concept of a line segment which has no thickness, we may imagine a line that is visible but imperceptibly wide. That much may, just about, be arranged in physical reality. But mathematically the line must continue to have no thickness when we view it under arbitrarily powerful magnification. That is not a property of any physical line, but it can easily be achieved in the virtual reality of our imagination.
Imagination is a straightforward form of virtual reality. What may not be so obvious is that our ‘direct’ experience of the world through our senses is virtual reality too. For our external experience is never direct; nor do we even experience the signals in our nerves directly — we would not know what to make of the streams of electrical crackles that they carry. What we experience directly is a virtual-reality rendering, conveniently generated for us by our  unconscious minds from sensory data plus complex inborn and acquired theories (i.e. programs) about how to interpret them.
We realists take the view that reality is out there: objective, physical and independent of what we believe about it. But we never experience that reality directly. Every last scrap of our external experience is of virtual reality. And every last scrap of our knowledge — including our knowledge of the non-physical worlds of logic, mathematics and philosophy, and of imagination, fiction, art and fantasy — is encoded in the form of programs for the rendering of those worlds on our brain’s own virtual-reality generator.
So it is not just science — reasoning about the physical world — that involves virtual reality. All reasoning, all thinking and all external experience are forms of virtual reality. These things are physical processes which so far have been observed in only one place in the universe, namely the vicinity of the planet Earth. We shall see in Chapter 8 that all living processes involve virtual reality too, but human beings in particular have a special relationship with it. Biologically speaking, the virtual-reality rendering of their environment is the characteristic means by which human beings survive. In other words, it is the reason why human beings exist. The ecological niche that human beings occupy depends on virtual reality as directly and as absolutely as the ecological niche that koala bears occupy depends on eucalyptus leaves.
