# 6 - Universality and the Limits of Computation

**6**
**Universality and the Limits of Computation**
The heart of a virtual-reality generator is its computer, and the question of what environments can be rendered in virtual reality must eventually come down to the question of what computations can be performed. Even today, the repertoire of virtual-reality generators is limited as much by their computers as by their image generators. Whenever a new, faster computer, with more memory and better image-processing hardware, is incorporated into a virtual-reality generator, the repertoire is enlarged. But will this always be so, or will we eventually encounter full universality, as I have argued we should expect to in the case of image generators? In other words, is there a single virtual-reality generator, buildable once and for all, that could be programmed to render any environment that the human mind is capable of experiencing?
Just as with image generators, we do not mean by this that a single virtual-reality generator might contain within itself the specifications of all logically possible environments. We mean only that for every logically possible environment it would be possible to program the generator to render that environment. We can envisage encoding the programs on, for example, magnetic disks. The more complex the environment, the more disks may be needed to store the corresponding program. So to render complex environments the machine must have a mechanism, just as I have described for the universal image generator, that can read unlimited numbers of disks. Unlike an image generator, a virtual-reality generator may need a growing amount of ‘working memory’ to store the intermediate results of its calculations. We may envisage this as  being provided in the form of blank disks. Once again, the fact that a machine needs to be supplied with energy, blank disks and maintenance does not prevent us from regarding it as a ‘single machine’, provided that these operations are not tantamount to changing the machine’s design, and are not forbidden by the laws of physics.
In this sense, then, a computer with an effectively unlimited memory capacity can be envisaged in principle. But a computer with an unlimited speed of computation cannot. A computer of given design will always have a fixed maximum speed, which only design changes can increase. Therefore a given virtual-reality generator will not be able to perform unlimited amounts of computation per unit time. Will this not limit its repertoire? If an environment is so complex that the computation of what the user should be seeing one second from now takes the machine more than one second to compute, how can the machine possibly render that environment accurately? To achieve universality, we need a further technological trick.
To extend its repertoire as far as is physically possible, a virtual-reality generator would have to take control of one further attribute of the user’s sensory system, namely the processing speed of the user’s brain. If the human brain were like an electronic computer, this would simply be a matter of changing the rate at which its ‘clock’ emits synchronizing pulses. No doubt the brain’s ‘clock’ will not be so easily controlled. But again this presents no problem of principle. The brain is a finite physical object, and all its functions are physical processes which in principle can be slowed down or stopped. The ultimate virtual-reality generator would have to be capable of doing that.
To achieve a perfect rendering of environments which call for a lot of computation, a virtual-reality generator would have to operate in something like the following way. Each sensory nerve is physically capable of relaying signals at a certain maximum rate, because a nerve cell which has fired cannot fire again until about one millisecond later. Therefore, immediately after a particular nerve has fired, the computer has at least one millisecond to decide  whether, and when, that nerve should fire again. If it has computed that decision within, say, half a millisecond, no tampering with the brain’s speed is necessary, and the computer merely fires the nerve at the appropriate times. Otherwise, the computer causes the brain to slow down (or, if necessary, to stop) until the calculation of what should happen next is complete; it then restores the brain’s normal speed. What would this feel like to the user? By definition, like nothing. The user would experience only the environment specified in the program, without any slowing down, stopping or restarting. Fortunately it is never necessary for a virtual-reality generator to make the brain operate *faster* than normal; that would eventually raise problems of principle because, among other things, no signal can travel faster than the speed of light.
This method allows us to specify in advance an arbitrarily complicated environment whose simulation requires any finite amount of computation, and to experience that environment at any subjective speed and level of detail that our minds are capable of assimilating. If the requisite calculations are too numerous for the computer to perform within the subjectively perceived time, the experience will be unaffected, but the user will pay for its complexity in terms of externally elapsed time. The user might emerge from the virtual-reality generator after what seemed subjectively like a five-minute experience, to find that years had passed in physical reality.
A user whose brain is switched off, for however long, and then switched on again will have an uninterrupted experience of some environment. But a user whose brain is switched off for ever has no experiences at all from that moment on. This means that a program which might at some point switch the user’s brain off, and never switch it on again, does not generate an environment for the user to experience and therefore does not qualify as a valid program for a virtual-reality generator. But a program which, eventually, always switches the user’s brain back on causes the virtual-reality generator to render some environment. Even a program which emits no nerve signals at all renders the dark, silent environment of perfect sensory isolation.
In our search for the ultimate in virtual-reality we have strayed a very long way from what is feasible today, or even from what is on any foreseeable technological horizon. So let me stress again that for our present purposes technological obstacles are irrelevant. We are not investigating what sorts of virtual-reality generator can be built, or even, necessarily, what sorts of virtual-reality generator will ever be built, by human engineers. We are investigating what the laws of physics do and do not allow in the way of virtual reality. The reason why this is important has nothing to do with the prospects for making better virtual-reality generators. It is that the relationship between virtual reality and ‘ordinary’ reality is part of the deep, unexpected structure of the world, which this book is about.
By considering various tricks — nerve stimulation, stopping and starting the brain, and so on — we have managed to envisage a physically possible virtual-reality generator whose repertoire covers the entire sensory range, is fully interactive, and is not constrained by the speed or memory capacity of its computer. Is there anything outside the repertoire of such a virtual-reality generator? Would its repertoire be the set of all logically possible environments? It would not. Even this futuristic machine’s repertoire is drastically circumscribed by the mere fact of its being a physical object. It does not even scratch the surface of what is logically possible, as I shall now show.
The basic idea of the proof — known as a *diagonal argument* — predates the idea of virtual reality. It was first used by the nineteenth-century mathematician Georg Cantor to prove that there are infinite quantities greater than the infinity of natural numbers (1, 2, 3 . . .). The same form of proof is at the heart of the modern theory of computation developed by Alan Turing and others in the 1930s. It was also used by Kurt Gödel to prove his celebrated ‘incompleteness theorem’, of which more in Chapter 10.
Each environment in our machine’s repertoire is generated by some program for its computer. Imagine the set of all valid programs for this computer. From a physical point of view, each such program specifies a particular set of values for physical variables, on the disks or other media, that represent the computer’s program.  We know from quantum theory that all such variables are quantized, and therefore that, no matter how the computer works, the set of possible programs is discrete. Each program can therefore be expressed as a finite sequence of symbols in a discrete code or computer language. There are infinitely many such programs, but each one can contain only a finite number of symbols. That is because symbols are physical objects, made of matter in recognizable configurations, and one could not manufacture an infinite number of them. As I shall explain in Chapter 10, these intuitively obvious physical requirements — that the programs must be quantized, and that each of them must consist of a finite number of symbols and can be executed in a sequence of steps — are more substantive than they seem. They are the only consequences of the laws of physics that are needed as input for the proof, but they are enough to impose drastic restrictions on the repertoire of any physically possible machine. Other physical laws may impose even more restrictions, but they would not affect the conclusions of this chapter.
Now let us imagine this infinite set of possible programs arranged in an infinitely long list, and numbered Program 1, Program 2, and so on. They could, for instance, be arranged in ‘alphabetical’ order with respect to the symbols in which they are expressed. Because each program generates an environment, this list can also be regarded as a list of all the environments in the machine’s repertoire; we may call them Environment 1, Environment 2, and so on. It could be that some of the environments are repeated in the list, because two different programs might in effect perform the same calculations, but that will not affect the argument. What is important is that each environment in our machine’s repertoire should appear at least once in the list.
A simulated environment may be limited or unlimited in apparent physical size and apparent duration. An architect’s simulation of a house, for example, can be run for an unlimited time, but will probably cover only a limited volume. A video game might allow the user only a finite time for play before the game ends, or it might render a game-universe of unlimited size, allow an unlimited  amount of exploration and end only when the user deliberately ends it. To make the proof simpler, let us consider only programs that continue to run for ever. That is not much of a restriction, because if a program halts we can always choose to regard its lack of response as being the response of a sensory-isolation environment.
Let me define a class of logically possible environments which I shall call *Cantgotu environments*, partly in honour of *Cant*or, Gödel and *Tu*ring, and partly for a reason I shall explain shortly. They are defined as follows. For the first subjective minute, a Cantgotu environment behaves differently from Environment 1 (generated by Program 1 of our generator). It does not matter how it does behave, so long as it is, to the user, recognizably different from Environment 1. During the second minute it behaves differently from Environment 2 (though it is now allowed to resemble Environment 1 again). During the third minute, it behaves differently from Environment 3, and so on. Any environment that satisfies these rules I shall call a Cantgotu environment.
Now, since a Cantgotu environment does not behave exactly like Environment 1, it cannot *be* Environment 1; since it does not behave exactly like Environment 2, it cannot *be* Environment 2. Since it is guaranteed sooner or later to behave differently from Environment 3, Environment 4 and every other environment on the list, it cannot be any of those either. But that list contains all the environments that are generated by every possible program for this machine. It follows that none of the Cantgotu environments are in the machine’s repertoire. The Cantgotu environments are environments that we *can’t go to* using this virtual-reality generator.
Clearly there are enormously many Cantgotu environments, because the definition leaves enormous freedom in choosing how they should behave, the only constraint being that during each minute they should not behave in one particular way. It can be proved that, for every environment in the repertoire of a given virtual-reality generator, there are infinitely many Cantgotu environments that it cannot render. Nor is there much scope for extending the repertoire by using a range of different virtual-reality  generators. Suppose that we had a hundred of them, each (for the sake of argument) with a different repertoire. Then the whole collection, combined with the programmable control system that determines which of them shall be used to run a given program, is just a larger virtual-reality generator. That generator is subject to the argument I have given, so for every environment it can render there will be infinitely many that it cannot. Furthermore, the assumption that different virtual-reality generators might have different repertoires turns out to be over-optimistic. As we shall see in a moment, all sufficiently sophisticated virtual-reality generators have essentially the same repertoire.
Thus our hypothetical project of building the ultimate virtual-reality generator, which had been going so well, has suddenly run into a brick wall. Whatever improvements may be made in the distant future, the repertoire of the entire technology of virtual reality will never grow beyond a certain fixed set of environments. Admittedly this set is infinitely large, and very diverse by comparison with human experience prior to virtual-reality technology. Nevertheless, it is only an infinitesimal fraction of the set of all logically possible environments.
What would it feel like to be in a Cantgotu environment? Although the laws of physics do not permit us to be in one, it is still logically possible and so it is legitimate to ask what it would feel like. Certainly, it could give us no new *sensations*, because a universal image generator is possible and is assumed to be part of our high-technology virtual-reality generator. So a Cantgotu environment would seem mysterious to us only after we had experienced it and reflected on the results. It would go something like this. Suppose you are a virtual-reality buff in the distant, ultra-high-technology future. You have become jaded, for it seems to you that you have already tried everything interesting. But then one day a genie appears and claims to be able to transport you to a Cantgotu environment. You are sceptical, but agree to put its claim to the test. You are whisked away to the environment. After a few experiments you seem to recognize it — it responds just like one of your favourite environments, which on your home virtual-reality system  has program number X. However, you keep experimenting, and eventually, during the Xth subjective minute of the experience, the environment responds in a way that is markedly different from anything that Environment X would do. So you give up the idea that this is Environment X. You may then notice that everything that has happened so far is also consistent with another renderable environment, Environment Y. But then, during the Yth subjective minute you are proved wrong again. The characteristic of a Cantgotu environment is simply this: no matter how often you guess, no matter how complex a program you contemplate as being the one that might be rendering the environment, you will always be proved wrong because *no* program will render it, on your virtual-reality generator or on any other.
Sooner or later you will have to bring the test to a close. At that point you may well decide to concede the genie’s claim. That is not to say that you could ever *prove* that you had been in a Cantgotu environment, for there is always an even more complex program that the genie might have been running, which would match your experiences so far. That is just the general feature of virtual reality that I have already discussed, namely that experience cannot prove that one is in a given environment, be it the Centre Court at Wimbledon or an environment of the Cantgotu type.
Anyway, there are no such genies, and no such environments. So we must conclude that physics does not allow the repertoire of a virtual-reality generator to be anywhere near as large as logic alone would allow. How large can it be?
Since we cannot hope to render all logically possible environments, let us consider a weaker (but ultimately more interesting) sort of universality. Let us define a *universal virtual-reality generator* as one whose repertoire contains that of every other physically possible virtual-reality generator. Can such a machine exist? It can. Thinking about futuristic devices based on computer-controlled nerve stimulation makes this obvious — in fact, almost too obvious. Such a machine could be programmed to have the characteristics of any rival machine. It could calculate how that machine would respond, under any given program, to any behaviour by the user,  and so could render those responses with perfect accuracy (from the point of view of any given user). I say that this is ‘almost too obvious’ because it contains an important assumption about what the proposed device, and more specifically its computer, could be programmed to do: given the appropriate program, and enough time and storage media, it could calculate the output of any computation performed by any other computer, including the one in the rival virtual-reality generator. Thus the feasibility of a universal virtual-reality generator depends on the existence of a universal computer — a single machine that can calculate anything that can be calculated.
As I have said, this sort of universality was first studied not by physicists but by mathematicians. They were trying to make precise the intuitive notion of ‘computing’ (or ‘calculating’ or ‘proving’) something in mathematics. They did not take on board the fact that mathematical calculation is a physical process (in particular, as I have explained, it is a virtual-reality rendering process), so it is impossible to determine by mathematical reasoning what can or cannot be calculated mathematically. That depends entirely on the laws of physics. But instead of trying to deduce their results from physical laws, mathematicians postulated abstract models of ‘computation’, and *defined* ‘calculation’ and ‘proof’ in terms of those models. (I shall discuss this interesting mistake in Chapter 10.) That is how it came about that over a period of a few months in 1936, three mathematicians, Emil Post, Alonzo Church and, most importantly, Alan Turing, independently created the first abstract designs for universal computers. Each of them conjectured that his model of ‘computation’ did indeed correctly formalize the traditional, intuitive notion of mathematical ‘computation’. Consequently, each of them also conjectured that his model was equivalent to (had the same repertoire as) any other reasonable formalization of the same intuition. This is now known as the *Church — Turing conjecture.*
Turing’s model of computation, and his conception of the nature of the problem he was solving, was the closest to being physical. His abstract computer, the *Turing machine*, was abstracted from the idea of a paper tape divided into squares, with one of a finite  number of easily distinguishable symbols written on each square. Computation was performed by examining one square at a time, moving the tape backwards or forwards, and erasing or writing one of the symbols according to simple, unambiguous rules. Turing proved that one particular computer of this type, the *universal Turing machine*, had the combined repertoire of all other Turing machines. He conjectured that this repertoire consisted precisely of ‘every function that would naturally be regarded as computable’. He meant computable *by mathematicians.*
But mathematicians are rather untypical physical objects. Why should we assume that rendering them in the act of performing calculations is the ultimate in computational tasks? It turns out that it is not. As I shall explain in Chapter 9, *quantum computers* can perform computations of which no (human) mathematician will ever, even in principle, be capable. It is implicit in Turing’s work that he expected what ‘would naturally be regarded as computable’ to be also what could, at least in principle, be computed in nature. This expectation is tantamount to a stronger, physical version of the Church — Turing conjecture. The mathematician Roger Penrose has suggested that it should be called the *Turing principle:* **The Turing principle**
(for abstract computers simulating physical objects) 
*There exists an abstract universal computer whose repertoire* 
*includes any computation that any physically possible object can* 
*perform.*

Turing believed that the ‘universal computer’ in question was the universal Turing machine. To take account of the wider repertoire of quantum computers, I have stated the principle in a form that does not specify which particular ‘abstract computer’ does the job.
The proof I have given of the existence of Cantgotu environments is essentially due to Turing. As I said, he was not thinking explicitly in terms of virtual reality, but an ‘environment that can be rendered’ does correspond to a class of mathematical questions whose answers can be calculated. Those questions are *computable*. The remainder, the questions for which there is no way of calculating  the answer, are called *non-computable*. If a question is non-computable that does not mean that it has no answer, or that its answer is in any sense ill-defined or ambiguous. On the contrary, it means that it definitely has an answer. It is just that physically there is no way, even in principle, of obtaining that answer (or more precisely, since one could always make a lucky, unverifiable guess, of proving that it is the answer). For example, a *prime pair* is a pair of prime numbers whose difference is 2, such as 3 and 5, or 11 and 13. Mathematicians have tried in vain to answer the question whether there are infinitely many such pairs, or only a finite number of them. It is not even known whether this question is computable. Let us suppose that it is not. That is to say that no one, and no computer, can ever produce a proof either that there are only finitely many prime pairs or that there are infinitely many. Even so, the question does have an answer: one can say with certainty that either there is a highest prime pair or there are infinitely many prime pairs; there is no third possibility. The question remains well-defined, even though we may never know the answer.
In virtual-reality terms: no physically possible virtual-reality generator can render an environment in which answers to non-computable questions are provided to the user on demand. Such environments are of the Cantgotu type. And conversely, every Cantgotu environment corresponds to a class of mathematical questions (‘what would happen next in an environment defined in such-and-such a way?’) which it is physically impossible to answer.
Although non-computable questions are infinitely more numerous than computable ones, they tend to be more esoteric. That is no accident. It is because the parts of mathematics that we tend to consider the least esoteric are those we see reflected in the behaviour of physical objects in familiar situations. In such cases we can often use those physical objects to answer questions about the corresponding mathematical relationships. For example, we can count on our fingers because the physics of fingers naturally mimics the arithmetic of the whole numbers from zero to ten.
The repertoires of the three very different abstract computers defined by Turing, Church and Post were soon proved to be identical. So have the repertoires of all abstract models of mathematical computation that have since been proposed. This is deemed to lend support to the Church — Turing conjecture and to the universality of the universal Turing machine. However, the computing power of *abstract* machines has no bearing on what is computable in reality. The scope of virtual reality, and its wider implications for the comprehensibility of nature and other aspects of the fabric of reality, depends on whether the relevant computers are physically realizable. In particular, any genuine universal computer must itself be physically realizable. This leads to a stronger version of the Turing principle:**The Turing principle**
(for physical computers simulating each other) 
*It is possible to build a universal computer: a machine that can* 
*be programmed to perform any computation that any other* 
*physical object can perform.*

It follows that if a universal image generator were controlled by a universal computer, the resulting machine would be a universal virtual-reality generator. In other words, the following principle also holds:**The Turing principle**
(for virtual-reality generators rendering each other) 
*It is possible to build a virtual-reality generator whose repertoire* 
*includes that of every other physically possible virtual-reality* 
*generator.*

Now, any environment can be rendered by a virtual-reality generator of *some* sort (for instance, one could always regard a copy of that very environment as a virtual-reality generator with perhaps a very small repertoire). So it also follows from this version of the Turing principle that any physically possible environment can be rendered by the universal virtual-reality generator. Hence to express the very strong self-similarity that exists in the structure of reality, embracing not only computations but all physical processes, the Turing principle can be stated in this all-embracing form: **The Turing principle**
*It is possible to build a virtual-reality generator whose repertoire* 
*includes every physically possible environment.*

This is the strongest form of the Turing principle. It not only tells us that various parts of reality can resemble one another. It tells us that a single physical object, buildable once and for all (apart from maintenance and a supply of additional memory when needed), can perform with unlimited accuracy the task of describing or mimicking any other part of the multiverse. The set of all behaviours and responses of that one object exactly mirrors the set of all behaviours and responses of all other physically possible objects and processes.
This is just the sort of self-similarity that is necessary if, according to the hope I expressed in Chapter 1, the fabric of reality is to be truly unified and comprehensible. If the laws of physics as they apply to any physical object or process are to be comprehensible, they must be capable of being embodied in another physical object - the knower. It is also necessary that processes capable of creating such knowledge be physically possible. Such processes are called science. Science depends on experimental testing, which means physically rendering a law’s predictions and comparing it with (a rendering of) reality. It also depends on explanation, and that requires the abstract laws themselves, not merely their predictive content, to be capable of being rendered in virtual reality. This is a tall order, but reality does meet it. That is to say, the laws of physics meet it. The laws of physics, by conforming to the Turing principle, make it physically possible for those same laws to become known to physical objects. Thus, the laws of physics may be said to mandate their own comprehensibility.
Since building a universal virtual-reality generator is physically possible, it must actually *be* built in some universes. A caveat is necessary here. As I explained in Chapter 3, we can normally define a physically possible process as one that actually occurs somewhere in the multiverse. But strictly speaking, a universal virtual-reality generator is a limiting case that requires arbitrarily large resources  to operate. So what we really mean by saying that it is ‘physically possible’ is that virtual-reality generators with repertoires arbitrarily close to the set of all physically possible environments exist in the multiverse. Similarly, since the laws of physics are capable of being rendered, they *are* rendered somewhere. Thus it follows from the Turing principle (in the strong form for which I have argued) that the laws of physics do not merely mandate their own comprehensibility in some abstract sense — comprehensibility by abstract scientists, as it were. They imply the physical existence, somewhere in the multiverse, of entities that understand them arbitrarily well. I shall discuss this implication further in later chapters.
Now I return to the question I posed in the previous chapter, namely whether, if we had only a virtual-reality rendering based on the wrong laws of physics to learn from, we should expect to learn the wrong laws. The first thing to stress is that we *do* have only virtual reality based on the wrong laws to learn from! As I have said, all our external experiences are of virtual reality, generated by our own brains. And since our concepts and theories (whether inborn or learned) are never perfect, all our renderings are indeed inaccurate. That is to say, they give us the experience of an environment that is significantly different from the environment that we are really in. Mirages and other optical illusions are examples of this. Another is that we experience the Earth to be at rest beneath our feet, despite its rapid and complex motion in reality. Another is that we experience a single universe, and a single instance of our own conscious selves at a time, while in reality there are many. But these inaccurate and misleading experiences provide no argument against scientific reasoning. On the contrary, such deficiencies are its very starting-point.
We are embarked upon solving problems about physical reality. If it turns out that all this time we have merely been studying the programming of a cosmic planetarium, then that would merely mean that we have been studying a smaller portion of reality than we thought. So what? Such things have happened many times in the history of science, as our horizons have expanded beyond the Earth to include the solar system, our Galaxy, other galaxies, clusters of galaxies and so on, and, of course, parallel universes. Another such broadening may happen tomorrow; indeed, it may happen according to any one of an infinity of possible theories — or it may never happen. Logically, we must concede to solipsism and related doctrines that the reality we are learning about *might* be an unrepresentative portion of a larger, inaccessible or incomprehensible structure. But the general refutation that I have given of such doctrines shows us that it is irrational to build upon that possibility. Following Occam, we shall entertain such theories when, and only when, they provide better explanations than simpler rival theories.
However, there is a question we can still ask. Suppose that someone were imprisoned in a small, unrepresentative portion of our own reality — for instance, inside a universal virtual-reality generator that was programmed with the wrong laws of physics. What could such prisoners learn about our external reality? At first sight, it seems impossible that they could discover anything at all about it. It may seem that the most they could discover would be the laws of operation, i.e. the program, of the computer that operated their prison.
But that is not so! Again, we must bear in mind that if the prisoners are scientists, they will be seeking explanations as well as predictions. In other words, they will not be content with merely knowing the program that operates their prison: they will want to explain the origin and attributes of the various entities, including themselves, that they observe in the reality they inhabit. But in most virtual-reality environments no such explanation exists, for the rendered objects do not originate there but have been designed in the external reality. Suppose that you are playing a virtual-reality video game. For the sake of simplicity, suppose that the game is essentially chess (a first-person-perspective version perhaps, in which you adopt the persona of the king). You will use the normal methods of science to discover this environment’s ‘laws of physics’ and their emergent consequences. You will learn that checkmate and stalemate are ‘physically’ possible events (i.e. possible under your best understanding of how the environment works), but that a position with nine white pawns is not ‘physically’ possible. Once  you had understood the laws sufficiently well, you would notice that the chessboard is too simple an object to have, for instance, thoughts, and consequently that your own thought-processes cannot be governed by the laws of chess alone. Similarly, you could tell that during any number of games of chess the pieces can never evolve into self-reproducing configurations. And if life cannot evolve on the chessboard, far less can intelligence evolve. Therefore you would also infer that your own thought-processes could not have originated in the universe in which you found yourself. So even if you had lived within the rendered environment all your life, and did not have your own memories of the outside world to account for as well, your knowledge would not be confined to that environment. You would know that, even though the universe seemed to have a certain layout and obey certain laws, there must be a wider universe outside it, obeying different laws of physics. And you could even guess some of the ways in which these wider laws would have to differ from the chessboard laws.
Arthur C. Clarke once remarked that ‘any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic’. This is true, but slightly misleading. It is stated from the point of view of a pre-scientific thinker, which is the wrong way round. The fact is that to anyone who understands what virtual reality is, even genuine magic would be indistinguishable from technology, for there is no room for magic in a comprehensible reality. Anything that seems incomprehensible is regarded by science merely as evidence that there is something we have not yet understood, be it a conjuring trick, advanced technology or a new law of physics.
Reasoning from the premise of one’s own existence is called ‘anthropic’ reasoning. Although it has some applicability in cosmology, it usually has to be supplemented by substantive assumptions about the nature of ‘oneself’ before it yields definite conclusions. But anthropic reasoning is not the only way in which the inmates of our hypothetical virtual-reality prison could gain knowledge of an outside world. *Any* of their evolving explanations of their narrow world could, at the drop of a hat, reach into an outside reality. For instance, the very rules of chess contain what  a thoughtful player may realize is ‘fossil evidence’ of those rules having had an evolutionary history: there are ‘exceptional’ moves such as castling and capturing *en passant* which increase the complexity of the rules but improve the game. In explaining that complexity, one justifiably concludes that the rules of chess were not always as they are now.
In the Popperian scheme of things, explanations always lead to new problems which in turn require further explanations. If the prisoners fail, after a while, to improve upon their existing explanations, they may of course give up, perhaps falsely concluding that there are no explanations available. But if they do not give up they will be thinking about those aspects of their environment that seem inadequately explained. Thus if the high-technology jailers wanted to be confident that their rendered environment would forever fool their prisoners into thinking that there is no outside world, they would have their work cut out for them. The longer they wanted the illusion to last, the more ingenious the program would have to be. It is not enough that the inmates be prevented from observing the outside. The rendered environment would also have to be such that no explanations of anything inside would ever require one to postulate an outside. The environment, in other words, would have to be self-contained as regards explanations. But I doubt that any part of reality, short of the whole thing, has that property.
