# 8 - The Significance of Life

**8**
**The Significance of Life**
From ancient times until about the nineteenth century, it was taken for granted that some special animating force or factor was required to make the matter in living organisms behave so noticeably differently from other matter. This would mean in effect that there were two types of matter in the universe: *animate* matter and *inanimate* matter, with fundamentally different physical properties. Consider a living organism such as a bear. A photograph of a bear resembles the living bear in some respects. So do other inanimate objects such as a dead bear, or even, in a very limited fashion, the Great Bear constellation. But only animate matter can chase you through the forest as you dodge round trees, and catch you and tear you apart. Inanimate things never do anything as purposeful as that — or so the ancients thought. They had, of course, never seen a guided missile.
To Aristotle and other ancient philosophers, the most conspicuous feature of animate matter was its ability to initiate motion. They thought that when inanimate matter, such as a rock, has come to rest, it never moves again unless something kicks it. But animate matter, such as a hibernating bear, can be at rest and then begin to move without being kicked. With the benefit of modern science we can easily pick holes in these generalizations, and the very idea of ‘initiating motion’ now seems misconceived: we know that the bear wakes up because of electrochemical processes in its body. These may be initiated by external ‘kicks’ such as rising temperature, or by an internal biological clock which uses slow chemical reactions to keep time. Chemical reactions are nothing  more than the motion of atoms, so the bear never is entirely at rest. On the other hand a uranium nucleus, which is certainly not alive, may remain unchanged for billions of years and then, without any stimulus at all, suddenly and violently disintegrate. So the nominal content of Aristotle’s idea is worthless today. But he did get one important thing right which most modern thinkers have got wrong. In trying to associate life with a basic physical concept (albeit the wrong one, motion), he recognized that life is a fundamental phenomenon of nature.
A phenomenon is ‘fundamental’ if a sufficiently deep understanding of the world depends on understanding that phenomenon. Opinions differ, of course, about what aspects of the world are worth understanding, and consequently about what is deep or fundamental. Some would say that love is the most fundamental phenomenon in the world. Others believe that when one has learned certain sacred texts by heart, one understands everything that is worth understanding. The understanding that I am talking about is expressed in laws of physics, and in principles of logic and philosophy. A ‘deeper’ understanding is one that has more generality, incorporates more connections between superficially diverse truths, explains more with fewer unexplained assumptions. The most fundamental phenomena are implicated in the explanation of many other phenomena, but are themselves explained only by basic laws and principles.
Not all fundamental phenomena have large physical effects. Gravitation does, and is indeed a fundamental phenomenon. But the direct effects of quantum interference, such as the shadow patterns described in Chapter 2, are not large. It is quite hard even to detect them unambiguously. Nevertheless, we have seen that quantum interference is a fundamental phenomenon. Only by understanding it can we understand the basic fact about physical reality, namely the existence of parallel universes.
It was obvious to Aristotle that life is theoretically fundamental *and* has large physical effects. As we shall see, he was right. But it was obvious to him for quite the wrong reasons, namely the supposedly distinctive mechanical properties of animate matter, and  the domination of the Earth’s surface by living processes. Aristotle thought that the universe consists principally of what we now call the biosphere (life-containing region) of the Earth, with a few extra bits — celestial spheres and the Earth’s interior — tacked on above and below. If the Earth’s biosphere is the principal component of your cosmos, you will naturally think that trees and animals are at least as important as rocks and stars in the great scheme of things, especially if you know very little physics or biology. Modern science has led to almost the opposite conclusion. The Copernican revolution made the Earth subsidiary to a central, inanimate Sun. Subsequent discoveries in physics and astronomy showed not only that the universe is vast in comparison with the Earth, but that it is described with enormous accuracy by all-encompassing laws that make no mention of life at all. Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution explained the origin of life in terms that required no special physics, and since then we have discovered many of the detailed mechanisms of life, and found no special physics there either.
These spectacular successes of science, and the great generality of Newtonian and subsequent physics in particular, did much to make reductionism attractive. Since faith in revealed truth had been found to be incompatible with rationality (which requires an openness to criticism), many people nevertheless yearned for an ultimate foundation to things in which they could believe. If they did not yet have a reductive ‘theory of everything’ to believe in, then at least they aspired to one. It was taken for granted that a reductionist hierarchy of sciences, based on subatomic physics, was integral to the scientific world-view, and so it was criticized only by pseudo-scientists and others who rebelled against science itself. Thus, by the time I learned biology in school, the status of that subject had changed to the opposite of what Aristotle thought was obvious. Life was not considered to be fundamental at all. The very term ‘nature study’ — meaning biology — had become an anachronism. Fundamentally, nature was physics. I am oversimplifying only a little if I characterize the prevailing view as follows. Physics had an offshoot, chemistry, which studied the interactions of atoms. Chemistry had an offshoot, organic chemistry, which studied the  properties of compounds of the element carbon. Organic chemistry in turn had an offshoot, biology, which studied the chemical processes we call life. Only because we happen to *be* such a process was this remote offshoot of a fundamental subject interesting to us. Physics, in contrast, was regarded as self-evidently important in its own right because the entire universe, life included, conforms to its principles.
My classmates and I had to learn by heart a number of ‘characteristics of living things’. These were merely descriptive. They made little reference to fundamental concepts. Admittedly, (loco)*motion* was one of them — an ill-defined echo of the Aristotelian idea — but *respiration* and *excretion* were among them as well. There was also *reproduction, growth,* and the memorably named *irritability,* which meant that if you kick it, it kicks back. What these supposed characteristics of life lack in elegance and profundity, they do not make up in accuracy. As Dr Johnson would tell us, every real object is ‘irritable’. On the other hand, viruses do not respire, grow, excrete, or move (unless kicked), but they are alive. And sterile human beings do not reproduce, yet they are alive too.
The reason why both Aristotle’s view and that of my school textbooks failed to capture even a good taxonomic distinction between living and non-living things, let alone anything deeper, is that they both miss the point about what living things are (a mistake more forgivable in Aristotle because in his day no one knew any better). Modern biology does not try to define life by some characteristic physical attribute or substance — some living ‘essence’ — with which only animate matter is endowed. We no longer expect there to be any such essence, because we now know that ‘animate matter’, matter in the form of living organisms, is not the basis of life. It is merely one of the effects of life, and the basis of life is molecular. It is the fact that there exist molecules which cause certain environments to make copies of those molecules.
Such molecules are called *replicators*. More generally, a replicator is any entity that causes certain environments to copy it. Not all replicators are biological, and not all replicators are  molecules. For example, a self-copying computer program (such as a computer virus) is a replicator. A good joke is another replicator, for it causes its listeners to retell it to further listeners. Richard Dawkins has coined the term *meme* (rhyming with ‘cream’) for replicators that are human ideas, such as jokes. But all life on Earth is based on replicators that are molecules. These are called *genes,* and biology is the study of the origin, structure and operation of genes, and of their effects on other matter. In most organisms a gene consists of a sequence of smaller molecules, of which there are four different kinds, joined together in a chain. The names of the component molecules (adenine, cytosine, guanine and thymine) are usually shortened to A, C, G and T. The abbreviated chemical name for a chain of any number of A, C, G and T molecules, in any order, is DNA.
Genes are in effect computer programs, expressed as sequences of A, C, G and T symbols in a standard language called the *genetic code* which, with very slight variations, is common to all life on Earth. (Some viruses are based on a related type of molecule, RNA, while prions are, in a sense, self-replicating protein molecules.) Special structures within each organism’s cells act as computers to execute these gene programs. The execution consists of manufacturing certain molecules (proteins) from simpler molecules (amino acids) under certain external conditions. For example, the sequence ‘ATG’ is an instruction to incorporate the amino acid methionine into the protein molecule being manufactured.
Typically, a gene is chemically ‘switched on’ in certain cells of the body, and then instructs those cells to manufacture the corresponding protein. For example, the hormone insulin, which controls blood sugar levels in vertebrates, is such a protein. The gene for manufacturing it is present in almost every cell of the body, but it is switched on only in certain specialized cells in the pancreas, and then only when it is needed. At the molecular level, this is all that any gene can program its cellular computer to do: manufacture a certain chemical. But genes succeed in being replicators because these low-level chemical programs add up, through layer upon layer of complex control and feedback, to sophisticated  high-level instructions. Jointly, the insulin gene and the genes involved in switching it on and off amount to a complete program for the regulation of sugar in the bloodstream.
Similarly, there are genes which contain specific instructions for how and when they and other genes are to be copied, and instructions for the manufacture of further organisms of the same species, including the molecular computers which will execute all these instructions again in the next generation. There are also instructions for how the organism as a whole should respond to stimuli — for instance, when and how it should hunt, eat, mate, fight or run away. And so on.
A gene can function as a replicator only in certain environments. By analogy with an ecological ‘niche’ (the set of environments in which an organism can survive and reproduce), I shall also use the term *niche* for the set of all possible environments which a given replicator would cause to make copies of it. The niche of an insulin gene includes environments where the gene is located in the nucleus of a cell in the company of certain other genes, and the cell itself is appropriately located within a functioning organism, in a habitat suitable for sustaining the organism’s life and reproduction. But there are also other environments — such as biotechnology laboratories in which bacteria are genetically altered so as to incorporate the gene — which likewise copy the insulin gene. Those environments are also part of the gene’s niche, as are an infinity of other possible environments that are very different from those in which the gene evolved.
Not everything that can be copied is a replicator. A replicator *causes* its environment to copy it: that is, it contributes causally to its own copying. (My terminology differs slightly from that used by Dawkins. Anything that is copied, for whatever reason, he calls a replicator. What I call a replicator he would call an *active* replicator.) What it means in general to contribute causally to something is an issue to which I shall return, but what I mean here is that the presence and specific physical form of the replicator *makes a difference* to whether copying takes place or not. In other words, the replicator is copied if it is present, but if it were replaced by  almost any other object, even a rather similar one, that object would not be copied. For example, the insulin gene causes only one small step in the enormously complicated process of its own replication (that process being the whole life cycle of the organism). But the overwhelming majority of variants of that gene would not instruct cells to manufacture a chemical that could do the job of insulin. If the insulin genes in an individual organism’s cells were replaced by slightly different molecules, that organism would die (unless it were kept alive by other means), and would therefore fail to have offspring, and those molecules would not be copied. So whether copying takes place or not is exquisitely sensitive to the physical form of the insulin gene. The presence of the gene in its proper form and location *makes a difference* to whether copying takes place, which makes it a replicator, though there are countless other causes contributing to its replication as well.
Along with genes, *random* sequences of A, C, G and T, sometimes *called junk DNA* sequences, are present in the DNA of most organisms. They are also copied and passed on to the organisms’ offspring. However, if such a sequence is replaced by almost any other sequence of similar length, it is still copied. So we can infer that the copying of such sequences does not depend on their specific physical form. Unlike genes, junk DNA sequences are not programs. If they have a function (and it is not known whether they do), it cannot be to carry information of any kind. Although they are copied, they do not contribute causally to their own copying, and are therefore not replicators.
Actually, that is an exaggeration. Anything that is copied must have made at least some causal contribution to that copying. Junk DNA sequences, for instance, are made of DNA, which allows the cellular computer to copy them. It cannot copy molecules other than DNA. It is not usually illuminating to consider something as a replicator if its causal contribution to its own replication is small, though strictly speaking being a replicator is a matter of degree. I shall define the *degree of adaptation* of a replicator to a given environment as the degree to which the replicator contributes causally to its own replication in that environment. If a replicator is  well adapted to most environments of a niche, we may call it well adapted to the niche. We have just seen that the insulin gene is highly adapted to its niche. Junk DNA sequences have a negligible degree of adaptation by comparison with the insulin gene, or any other bona fide gene, but they are far more adapted to that niche than most molecules are.
Notice that to quantify degrees of adaptation, we have to consider not only the replicator in question but also a range of variants of it. The more sensitive the copying in a given environment is to the replicator’s exact physical structure, the more adapted the replicator is to that environment. For highly adapted replicators (which are the only ones worth calling replicators) we need consider only fairly small variations, because under most large variations they would no longer be replicators. So we are contemplating replacing the replicator by broadly similar objects. To quantify the degree of adaptation to a niche, we have to consider the replicator’s degree of adaptation to each environment of the niche. We must therefore consider variants of the environment as well as of the replicator. If most variants of the replicator fail to cause most environments of its niche to copy them, then it would follow that our replicator’s form is a significant cause of its own copying in that niche, which is what we mean by saying that it is highly adapted to the niche. On the other hand, if most variants of the replicator would be copied in most of the environments of the niche, then the form of our replicator makes little difference, in that copying would occur anyway. In that case, our replicator makes little causal contribution to its copying, and it is not highly adapted to that niche.
So the degree of adaptation of a replicator depends not only on what that replicator does in its actual environment, but also on what a vast number of other objects, most of which do not exist, *would* do, in a vast number of environments other than the actual one. We have encountered this curious sort of property before. The accuracy of a virtual-reality rendering depends not only on the responses the machine actually makes to what the user actually does, but also on responses it does not, in the event, make  to things the user does not in fact do. This similarity between living processes and virtual reality is no coincidence, as I shall shortly explain.
The most important factor determining a gene’s niche is usually that the gene’s replication depends on the presence of other genes. For example, the replication of a bear’s insulin gene depends not only on the presence, in the bear’s body, of all its other genes, but also on the presence, in the external environment, of genes from other organisms. Bears cannot survive without food, and the genes for manufacturing that food exist only in other organisms.
Different types of gene which need each other’s cooperation to replicate often live joined together in long DNA chains, the DNA of an *organism.* An organism is the sort of thing — such as an animal, plant or microbe — which in everyday terms we usually think of as being alive. But it follows from what I have said that ‘alive’ is at best a courtesy title when applied to the parts of an organism other than its DNA. *An organism is not a replicator*: it is part of the environment of replicators — usually the most important part after the other genes. The remainder of the environment is the type of habitat that can be occupied by the organism (such as mountain tops or ocean bottoms) and the particular life-style within that habitat (such as hunter or filter-feeder) which enables the organism to survive for long enough for its genes to be replicated.
In everyday parlance we speak of organisms ‘reproducing themselves’; indeed, this was one of the supposed ‘characteristics of living things’. In other words, we think of organisms as replicators. But this is inaccurate. Organisms *are not copied* during reproduction; far less do they cause their own copying. They are constructed afresh according to blueprints embodied in the parent organisms’ DNA. For example, if the shape of a bear’s nose is altered in an accident, it may change the life-style of that particular bear, and the bear’s chances of surviving to ‘reproduce itself’ may be affected for better or worse. But the bear with the new shape of nose has no chance of being *copied.* If it does have offspring, they will have noses of the original shape. But make a change in  the corresponding gene (if you do it just after the bear is conceived, you need only change one molecule), and any offspring will not only have noses of the new shape, but copies of the new gene as well. This shows that the shape of each nose is caused by that gene, and not by the shape of any previous nose. So the shape of the bear’s nose makes no causal contribution to the shape of the offspring’s nose. But the shape of the bear’s genes contributes both to their own copying and to the shape of the bear’s nose *and* of its offspring’s nose.
So an organism is the immediate environment which copies the real replicators: the organism’s genes. Traditionally, a bear’s nose and its den would have been classified as living and non-living entities, respectively. But that distinction is not rooted in any significant difference. The role of the bear’s nose is fundamentally no different from that of its den. Neither is a replicator, though new instances of them are continually being made. Both the nose and the den are merely parts of the environment which the bear’s genes manipulate in the course of getting themselves replicated.
This gene-based understanding of life — regarding organisms as part of the environment of genes — has implicitly been the basis of biology since Darwin, but it was overlooked until at least the 1960s, and not fully understood until Richard Dawkins published *The Selfish Gene* (1976) *and The Extended Phenotype* (1982).
I now return to the question whether life is a fundamental phenomenon of nature. I have warned against the reductionist assumption that emergent phenomena, such as life, are necessarily less fundamental than microscopic physical ones. Nevertheless, everything I have just been saying about what life is seems to point to its being a mere side-effect at the end of a long chain of side-effects. For it is not merely the *predictions* of biology that reduce, in principle, to those of physics: it is, on the face of it, also the explanations. As I have said, the great explanatory theories of Darwin (in modern versions such as that propounded by Dawkins), and of modern biochemistry, *are* reductive. Living molecules — genes — are merely molecules, obeying the same laws of physics and chemistry as non-living ones. They contain no special substance, nor do they have any special physical attributes. They just happen, in certain environments, to be replicators. The property of being a replicator is highly contextual — that is, it depends on intricate details of the replicator’s environment: an entity is a replicator in one environment and not in another. Also, the property of being adapted to a niche does not depend on any simple, intrinsic physical attribute that the replicator has at the time, but on effects that it may cause in the future — and under hypothetical circumstances at that (i.e. in variants of the environment). Contextual and hypothetical properties are essentially derivative, so it is hard to see how a phenomenon characterized only by such properties could possibly be a fundamental phenomenon of nature.
As for the physical impact of life, the conclusion is the same: the effects of life seem negligibly small. For all we know, the planet Earth is the only place in the universe where life exists. Certainly we have seen no evidence of its existence elsewhere, so even if it is quite widespread its effects are too small to be perceptible to us. What we do see beyond the Earth is an active universe, seething with diverse, powerful but totally inanimate processes. Galaxies revolve. Stars condense, shine, flare, explode and collapse. High-energy particles and electromagnetic and gravitational waves stream in all directions. Whether life is or is not out there among all those titanic processes seems to make no difference. It seems that none of them would be in the slightest way affected if life *were* present. If the Earth were enveloped in a large solar flare, itself an insignificant event astrophysically, our biosphere would be instantly sterilized, and that catastrophe would have as little effect on the sun as a raindrop has on an erupting volcano. Our biosphere is, in terms of its mass, energy or any similar astrophysical measure of significance, a negligible fraction even of the Earth, yet it is a truism of astronomy that the solar system consists essentially of the Sun and Jupiter. Everything else (including the Earth) is ‘just impurities’. Moreover, the solar system is a negligible component of our Galaxy, the Milky Way, which is itself unremarkable among the many in the known universe. So it seems that, as Stephen Hawking put it, ‘The human race is just a chemical scum  on a moderate-sized planet, orbiting round a very average star in the outer suburb of one among a hundred billion galaxies.’
Thus the prevailing view today is that life, far from being central, either geometrically, theoretically or practically, is of almost inconceivable insignificance. Biology, in this picture, is a subject with the same status as geography. Knowing the layout of the city of Oxford is important to those of us who live there, but unimportant to those who never visit Oxford. Similarly, it seems that life is a property of some parochial area, or perhaps areas, of the universe, fundamental to us because we are alive, but not at all fundamental either theoretically or practically in the larger scheme of things.
But remarkably, this appearance is misleading. It is simply not true that life is insignificant in its physical effects, nor is it theoretically derivative.
As a first step to explaining this, let me explain my earlier remark that life is a form of virtual-reality generation. I have used the word ‘computers’ for the mechanisms that execute gene programs inside living cells, but that is slightly loose terminology. Compared with the general-purpose computers that we manufacture artificially, they do more in some respects and less in others. One could not easily program them to do word processing or to factorize large numbers. On the other hand, they exert exquisitely accurate, interactive control over the responses of a complex environment (the organism) to everything that may happen to it. And this control is directed towards causing the environment to act back upon the genes in a specific way (namely, to replicate them) such that the net effect on the genes is as independent as possible of what may be happening outside. This is more than just computing. It is virtual-reality rendering.
The analogy with the human technology of virtual reality is not perfect. First, although genes are enveloped, just as a user of virtual reality is, in an environment whose detailed constitution and behaviour are specified by a program (which the genes themselves embody), the genes do not *experience* that environment because they have neither senses nor experiences. So if an organism is a virtual-reality rendering specified by its genes, it is a rendering  without an audience. Second, the organism is not only being rendered, it is being manufactured. It is not a matter of ‘fooling’ the gene into believing that there is an organism out there. The organism really is out there.
However, these differences are unimportant. As I have said, *all* virtual-reality rendering physically manufactures the rendered environment. The inside of any virtual-reality generator in the act of rendering is precisely a real, physical environment, manufactured to have the properties specified in the program. It is just that we users sometimes choose to interpret it as a different environment, which happens to feel the same. As for the absence of a user, let us consider explicitly what the role of the user of virtual reality is. First, it is to kick the rendered environment and to be kicked back in return — in other words, to interact with the environment in an autonomous way. In the biological case, that role is performed by the external habitat. Second, it is to provide the *intention* behind the rendering. That is to say, it makes little sense to speak of a particular situation as being a virtual-reality rendering if there is no concept of the rendering being accurate or inaccurate. I have said that the accuracy of a rendering is the closeness, as perceived by the user, of the rendered environment to the intended one. But what does accuracy mean for a rendering which no one intended and no one perceives? It means the degree of adaptation of the genes to their niche. We can infer the ‘intention’ of genes to render an environment that will replicate them, from Darwin’s theory of evolution. Genes become extinct if they do not enact that ‘intention’ as efficiently or resolutely as other competing genes.
So living processes and virtual-reality renderings are, superficial differences aside, the same sort of process. Both involve the physical embodying of general theories about an environment. In both cases these theories are used to realize that environment and to control, interactively, not just its instantaneous appearance but also its detailed response to general stimuli.
*Genes embody knowledge about their niches*. Everything of fundamental significance about the phenomenon of life depends on this property, and not on replication *per se*. So we can now take  the discussion beyond replicators. In principle, one could imagine a species whose genes were unable to replicate, but instead were adapted to keep their physical form unchanged by continual self-maintenance and by protecting themselves from external influences. Such a species is unlikely to evolve naturally, but it might be constructed artificially. Just as the degree of adaptation of a replicator is defined as the degree to which it contributes causally to its own replication, we can define the degree of adaptation of these non-replicating genes as the degree to which they contribute to their own survival in a particular form. Consider a species whose genes were patterns etched in diamond. An ordinary diamond with a haphazard shape might survive for aeons under a wide range of circumstances, but that shape is not *adapted* for survival because a differently shaped diamond would also survive under similar circumstances. But if the diamond-encoded genes of our hypothetical species caused the organism to behave in a way which, for instance, protected the diamond’s etched surface from corrosion in a hostile environment, or defended it against other organisms that would try to etch different information into it, or against thieves who would cut and polish it into a gemstone, then it would contain genuine adaptations for survival in those environments. (Incidentally, a gemstone *does* have a degree of adaptation for survival in the environment of present-day Earth. Humans seek out uncut diamonds and change their shapes to those of gemstones. But they seek out gemstones and preserve their shapes. So in this environment, the shape of a gemstone contributes causally to its own survival.)
When the manufacture of these artificial organisms ceased, the number of instances of each non-replicating gene could never again increase. But nor would it decrease, so long as the knowledge it contained was sufficient for it to enact its survival strategy in the niche it occupied. Eventually a sufficiently large change in the habitat, or attrition caused by accidents, might wipe out the species, but it might well survive for as long as many a naturally occurring species. The genes of such species share all the properties of real genes except replication. In particular, they embody the knowledge  necessary to render their organisms in just the way that real genes do.
It is the *survival of knowledge*, and not necessarily of the gene or any other physical object, that is the common factor between replicating and non-replicating genes. So, strictly speaking, it is a piece of knowledge rather than a physical object that is or is not adapted to a certain niche. If it is adapted, then it has the property that once it is embodied in that niche, it will tend to remain so. With a replicator, the physical material that embodies it keeps changing, a new copy being assembled out of non-replicating components every time replication occurs. Non-replicating knowledge may also be successively embodied in *different* physical forms, as for example when a vintage sound recording is transferred from a vinyl record to magnetic tape, and later to compact disc. One could imagine another artificial non-replicator-based living organism that did the same sort of thing, taking every opportunity to recopy the knowledge in its genes onto the safest medium available. Perhaps one day our descendants will do that.
I think it would be perverse to call the organisms of these hypothetical species ‘inanimate’, but the terminology is not really important. The point is that although all known life is based on replicators, what the phenomenon of life is really about is knowledge. We can give a definition of adaptation directly in terms of knowledge: an entity is adapted to its niche if it embodies knowledge that causes the niche to keep that knowledge in existence. Now we are getting closer to the reason why life is fundamental. Life is about the physical embodiment of knowledge, and in Chapter 6 we came across a law of physics, the Turing principle, which is also about the physical embodiment of knowledge. It says that it is possible to embody the laws of physics, as they apply to every physically possible environment, in programs for a virtual-reality generator. Genes are such programs. Not only that, but all other virtual-reality programs that physically exist, or will ever exist, are direct or indirect effects of life. For example, the virtual-reality programs that run on our computers and in our brains are indirect effects of human life. So life is the means — presumably a necessary  means — by which the effects referred to in the Turing principle have been implemented in nature.
This is encouraging, but it is not quite sufficient to establish that life is a fundamental phenomenon. For I have not yet established that the Turing principle itself has the status of a fundamental law. A sceptic might argue that it does not. It is a law about the physical embodiment of knowledge, and the sceptic might take the view that knowledge is a parochial, anthropocentric concept rather than a fundamental one. That is, it is one of those things which is significant to us because of what we are — animals whose ecological niche depends on creating and applying knowledge — but not significant in an absolute sense. To a koala bear, whose ecological niche depends on eucalyptus leaves, eucalyptus is significant; to the knowledge-wielding ape *Homo sapiens,* knowledge is significant.
But the sceptic would be wrong. Knowledge is significant not only to *Homo sapiens,* nor only on the planet Earth. I have said that whether something does or does not have a large physical impact is not decisive as to whether it is fundamental in nature. But it is relevant. Let us consider the astrophysical effects of knowledge.
The theory of stellar evolution — the structure and development of stars — is one of the success stories of science. (Note the clash of terminology here. The word ‘evolution’ in physics means development, or simply motion, not variation and selection.) Only a century ago, even the source of the Sun’s energy was unknown. The best physics of the day provided only the false conclusion that whatever its energy source was, the Sun could not have been shining for more than a hundred million years. Interestingly, the geologists and palaeontologists already knew, from fossil evidence of what life had been doing, that the Sun must have been shining on the Earth for a billion years at least. Then nuclear physics was discovered, and was applied in great detail to the physics of the interiors of stars. Since then the theory of stellar evolution has matured. We now understand what makes a star shine. For most types of star we can predict what temperature, colour, luminosity and diameter it has at each stage of its history, how long each stage lasts, what elements the star creates by nuclear transmutation,  and so on. This theory has been tested and borne out by observations of the Sun and other stars.
We can use the theory to predict the future development of the Sun. It says that the Sun will continue to shine with great stability for another five billion years or so; then it will expand to about a hundred times its present diameter to become a red giant star; then it will pulsate, flare into a nova, collapse and cool, eventually becoming a black dwarf. But will all this really happen to the Sun? Has every star that formed a few billion years before the Sun, with the same mass and composition, already become a red giant, as the theory predicts? Or is it possible that some apparently insignificant chemical processes on minor planets orbiting those stars might alter the course of nuclear and gravitational processes having overwhelmingly more mass and energy?
If the Sun does become a red giant, it will engulf and destroy the Earth. If any of our descendants, physical or intellectual, are still on the Earth at that time, they might not want that to happen. They might do everything in their power to prevent it.
Is it obvious that they will not be able to? Certainly, our present technology is far too puny to do the job. But neither our theory of stellar evolution nor any other physics we know gives any reason to believe that the task is impossible. On the contrary, we already know, in broad terms, what it would involve (namely, removing matter from the Sun). And we have several billion years to perfect our half-baked plans and put them into practice. If, in the event, our descendants do succeed in saving themselves in this way, then our present theory of stellar evolution, when applied to one particular star, the Sun, gives entirely the wrong answer. And the reason why it gives the wrong answer is that it does not take into account the effect of life on stellar evolution. It takes into account such fundamental physical effects as nuclear and electromagnetic forces, gravity, hydrostatic pressure and radiation pressure — but not life.
It seems likely that the knowledge required to control the Sun in this way could not evolve by natural selection alone, so it must specifically be *intelligent* life on whose presence the future of the Sun  depends. Now, it may be objected that it is a huge and unsupported assumption that intelligence will survive on Earth for several billion years, and even if it does, it is a further assumption that it will then possess the knowledge required to control the Sun. One current view is that intelligent life on Earth is even now in danger of destroying itself, if not by nuclear war then by some catastrophic side-effect of technological advance or scientific research. Many people think that if intelligent life is to survive on Earth, it will do so only by suppressing technological progress. So they might fear that our developing the technology required to regulate stars is incompatible with surviving for long enough to use that technology, and therefore that life on Earth is destined, one way or another, not to affect the evolution of the Sun.
I am sure that this pessimism is misguided, and, as I shall explain in Chapter 14, there is every reason to conjecture that our descendants will eventually control the Sun and much more. Admittedly, we can foresee neither their technology nor their wishes. They may choose to save themselves by emigrating from the solar system, or by refrigerating the Earth, or by any number of methods, inconceivable to us, that do not involve tampering with the Sun. On the other hand, they may wish to control the Sun much sooner than would be required to prevent it from entering its red giant phase (for example to harness its energy more efficiently, or to quarry it for raw materials to construct more living space for themselves). However, the point I am making here does not depend on our being able to predict what will happen, but only on the proposition that what will happen will depend on what knowledge our descendants have, and on how they choose to apply it. Thus one cannot predict the future of the Sun without taking a position on the future of life on Earth, and in particular on the future of knowledge. The colour of the Sun ten billion years hence depends on gravity and radiation pressure, on convection and nucleosynthesis. It does not depend at all on the geology of Venus, the chemistry of Jupiter, or the pattern of craters on the Moon. But it does depend on what happens to intelligent life on the planet Earth. It depends on politics and economics and the outcomes of wars. It depends on what  people do: what decisions they make, what problems they solve, what values they adopt, and on how they behave towards their children.
One cannot avoid this conclusion by adopting a pessimistic theory of the prospects for our survival. Such a theory does not follow from the laws of physics or from any other fundamental principle that we know, and can be justified only in high-level, human terms (such as ‘scientific knowledge has outrun moral knowledge’, or whatever). So, in arguing from such a theory one is implicitly conceding that theories of human affairs are necessary for making astrophysical predictions. And even if the human race will in the event fail in its efforts to survive, does the pessimistic theory apply to every extraterrestrial intelligence in the universe? If not — if some intelligent life, in some galaxy, will ever succeed in surviving for billions of years — then life is significant in the gross physical development of the universe.
Throughout our Galaxy and the multiverse, stellar evolution depends on whether and where intelligent life has evolved, and if so, on the outcomes of *its* wars and on how it treats *its* children. For example, we can predict roughly what proportions of stars of different colours (more precisely, of different spectral types) there should be in the Galaxy. To do that we shall have to make some assumptions about how much intelligent life there is out there, and what it has been doing (namely, that it has not been switching off too many stars). At the moment, our observations are consistent with there being no intelligent life outside our solar system. When our theories of the structure of our Galaxy are further refined, we shall be able to make more precise predictions, but again only on the basis of assumptions about the distribution and behaviour of intelligence in the Galaxy. If those assumptions are inaccurate we shall predict the wrong distribution of spectral types just as surely as if we were to make a mistake about the composition of interstellar gases, or about the mass of the hydrogen atom. And, if we detect certain anomalies in the distribution of spectral types, this could be evidence of the presence of extraterrestrial intelligence.
The cosmologists John Barrow and Frank Tipler have considered  the astrophysical effects that life would have if it survived for long *after* the time at which the Sun would otherwise become a red giant. They have found that life would eventually make major, qualitative changes to the structure of the Galaxy, and later to the structure of the whole universe. (I shall return to these results in Chapter 14.) So once again, any theory of the structure of the universe in all but its earliest stages must take a position on what life will or will not be doing by then. There is no getting away from it: the future history of the universe depends on the future history of knowledge. Astrologers used to believe that cosmic events influence human affairs; science believed for centuries that neither influences the other. Now we see that human affairs influence cosmic events.
It is worth reflecting on where we went astray in underestimating the physical impact of life. It was by being too parochial. (That is ironic, because the ancient consensus happened to avoid our mistake by being even more parochial.) In the universe *as we see it*, life has affected nothing of any astrophysical significance. However, we see only the past, and it is only the past of what is spatially near us that we see in any detail. The further we look into the universe, the further back in time we see and the less detail we see. But even the whole past — the history of the universe from the Big Bang until now — is just a small part of physical reality. There is at least ten times as much history still to go, between now and the Big Crunch (if that happens), and probably a lot more, to say nothing of the other universes. We cannot observe any of this, but when we apply our best theories to the future of the stars, and of the galaxies and the universe, we find plenty of scope for life to affect and, in the long run, to dominate everything that happens, just as it now dominates the Earth’s biosphere.
The conventional argument for the insignificance of life gives too much weight to bulk quantities like size, mass and energy. In the parochial past and present these were and are good measures of astrophysical significance, but there is no reason within physics why that should continue to be so. Moreover, the biosphere itself already provides abundant counter-examples to the general applicability of such measures of significance. In the third century BC, for  instance, the mass of the human race was about ten million tonnes. One might therefore conclude that it is unlikely that physical processes occurring in the third century BC and involving the motion of many times that mass could have been significantly affected by the presence or absence of human beings. But the Great Wall of China, whose mass is about three hundred million tonnes, was built at that time. Moving millions of tonnes of rock is the sort of thing that human beings do all the time. Nowadays it takes only a few dozen humans to excavate a million-tonne railway cutting or tunnel. (The point is made even more strongly if we make a fairer comparison, between the mass of rock shifted and the mass of that tiny part of the engineer’s, or emperor’s, brain that embodies the ideas, or memes, that cause the rock to be shifted.) The human race as a whole (or, if you like, its stock of memes) probably already has enough knowledge to destroy whole planets, if its survival depended on doing so. Even non-intelligent life has grossly transformed many times its own mass of the surface and atmosphere of the Earth. All the oxygen in our atmosphere, for instance — about a thousand trillion tonnes — was created by plants and was therefore a side-effect of the replication of genes, i.e. molecules, which were descendants of a single molecule. Life achieves its effects not by being larger, more massive or more energetic than other physical processes, but by being more knowledgeable. In terms of its gross effect on the outcomes of physical processes, knowledge is at least as significant as any other physical quantity.
But is there, as the ancients assumed there must be in the case of life, a basic physical difference between knowledge-bearing and non-knowledge-bearing objects, a difference that depends neither on the objects’ environments nor on their effects on the remote future, but only on the objects’ immediate physical attributes? Remarkably, there is. To see what it is, we must take the multiverse view.
Consider the DNA of a living organism, such as a bear, and suppose that somewhere in one of its genes we find the sequence TCGTCGTTTC. That particular string of ten molecules, in the special niche consisting of the rest of the gene and *its* niche, is a  replicator. It embodies a small but significant amount of knowledge. Now suppose, for the sake of argument, that we can find a junk-DNA (non-gene) segment in the bear’s DNA which also has the sequence TCGTCGTTTC. Nevertheless this sequence is not worth calling a replicator, because it contributes almost nothing to its replication, and it embodies no knowledge. It is a random sequence. So here we have two physical objects, both segments of the same DNA chain, one of which embodies knowledge and the other is a random sequence. But they are *physically identical*. How can knowledge be a fundamental physical quantity, if one object has it while a physically identical object does not?
It can, because these two segments are not really identical. They only look identical when viewed from some universes, such as ours. Let us look at them again, as they appear in other universes. We cannot directly observe other universes, so we must use theory.
We know that DNA in living organisms is naturally subject to random variations — *mutations* — in the sequence of A, C, G and T molecules. According to the theory of evolution, the adaptations in genes, and therefore the genes’ very existence, depend on such mutations having occurred. Because of mutations, populations of any gene contain a degree of variation, and individuals carrying genes with higher degrees of adaptation tend to have more offspring than other individuals. Most variations in a gene make it unable to cause its replication, because the altered sequence no longer instructs the cell to manufacture anything useful. Others merely make replication less likely (that is, they narrow the gene’s niche). But some may happen to embody new instructions that make replication *more* likely. Thus natural selection occurs. With each generation of variation and replication the degree of adaptation of the surviving genes tends to increase. Now, a random mutation, caused for instance by a cosmic-ray strike, causes variation not only within the population of the organism in one universe, but between universes as well. A cosmic ‘ray’ is a high-energy sub-atomic particle, and, like a photon emitted from a torch, it travels in different directions in different universes. So when a cosmic-ray particle strikes a DNA strand and causes a mutation, some of its counterparts in other universes are missing their copies of the DNA strand altogether, while others are striking it at different positions, and hence causing different mutations. Thus a single cosmic-ray strike on a single DNA molecule will in general cause a large range of different mutations to appear in different universes.
When we are considering what a particular object may look like in other universes, we must not look so far afield in the multiverse that it is impossible to identify a counterpart, in the other universe, of that object. Take a DNA segment, for instance. In some universes there are no DNA molecules at all. Some universes containing DNA are so dissimilar to ours that there is no way of identifying which DNA segment in the other universe corresponds to the one we are considering in this universe. It is meaningless to ask what our particular DNA segment looks like in such a universe, so we must consider only universes that are sufficiently similar to ours for this ambiguity not to arise. For instance, we could consider only those universes in which bears exist, and in which a sample of DNA from a bear has been placed in an analysing machine, which has been programmed to print out ten letters representing the structure at a specified position relative to certain landmarks on a specified DNA strand. The following discussion would be unaffected if we were to choose any other reasonable criterion for identifying corresponding segments of DNA in nearby universes.
By any such criterion, the bear’s gene segment must have the same sequence in almost all nearby universes as it does in ours. That is because it is presumably highly adapted, which means that most variants of it would not succeed in getting themselves copied in most variants of their environment, and so could not appear at that location in the DNA of a living bear. In contrast, when the non-knowledge-bearing DNA segment undergoes almost any mutation, the mutated version is still capable of being copied. Over generations of replication many mutations will have occurred, and most of them will have had no effect on replication. Therefore the junk-DNA segment, unlike its counterpart in the gene, will be thoroughly heterogeneous in different universes. It may well be that every possible variation of its sequence is equally represented  in the multiverse (that is what we should mean by its sequence being strictly random).
So the multiverse perspective reveals additional physical structure in the bear’s DNA. In this universe, it contains two segments with the sequence TCGTCGTTTC. One of them is part of a gene, while the other is not part of any gene. In most other nearby universes, the first of the two segments has the same sequence, TCGTCGTTTC, as it does in our universe, but the second segment varies greatly between nearby universes. So from the multiverse perspective the two segments are not even remotely alike (Figure 8.1).
Again we were too parochial, and were led to the false conclusion that knowledge-bearing entities can be physically identical to non-knowledge-bearing ones; and this in turn cast doubt on the fundamental status of knowledge. But now we have come almost full circle. We can see that the ancient idea that living matter has special physical properties was almost true: it is not living matter but *knowledge-bearing* matter that is physically special. Within one universe it looks irregular; across universes it has a regular structure, like a crystal in the multiverse.
So knowledge is a fundamental physical quantity after all, and the phenomenon of life is only slightly less so.
Imagine looking through an electron microscope at a DNA molecule from a bear’s cell, and trying to distinguish the genes from the non-gene sequences and to estimate the degree of adaptation of each gene. In any one universe, this task is impossible. The property of being a gene — that is, of being highly adapted — is, in so far as it can be detected within one universe, overwhelmingly complicated. It is an emergent property. You would have to make many copies of the DNA, with variations, use genetic engineering to create many bear embryos for each variant of the DNA, allow the bears to grow up and live in a variety of environments representative of the bear’s niche, and see which bears succeed in having offspring.
[Image: 018]
**FIGURE 8.1** *Multiverse view of two DNA segments which happen to be identical in our universe, one random and one from within a gene.*
 
But with a magic microscope that could see into other universes (which, I stress, is not possible: we are using theory to imagine — or render — what we know must be there) the task would be easy. As in Figure 8.1, the genes would stand out from the non-genes just as cultivated fields stand out from a jungle in an aerial photograph, or like crystals that have precipitated from solution. They are regular across many nearby universes, while all the non-gene, junk-DNA segments are irregular. As for the degree of adaptation of a gene, this is almost as easy to estimate. The better-adapted genes will have the same structure over a wider range of universes — they will have bigger ‘crystals’.
Now go to an alien planet, and try to find the local life-forms, if any. Again, this is a notoriously difficult task. You would have to perform complex and subtle experiments whose infinite pitfalls have been the subject of many a science-fiction story. But if only you could observe through a multiverse telescope, life and its consequences would be obvious at a glance. You need only look for complex structures that seem irregular in any one universe, but are identical across many nearby universes. If you see any, you will have found some physically embodied knowledge. Where there is knowledge, there must have been life, at least in the past.
Compare a living bear with the Great Bear constellation. The living bear is anatomically very similar in many nearby universes. It is not only its genes that have that property, but its whole body (though other attributes of its body, such as its weight, vary much more than the genes; that is because, for example, in different universes the bear has been more or less successful in its recent search for food). But in the Great Bear constellation there is no such  regularity from one universe to another. The shape of the constellation is a result of the initial conditions in the galactic gas from which the stars formed. Those conditions were random — very diverse in different universes, at a microscopic level — and the process of the formation of stars from that gas involved various instabilities which amplified the scale of the variations. As a result, the pattern of stars that we see in the constellation exists in only a very narrow range of universes. In most nearby variants of our universe there are also constellations in the sky, but they look different.
Finally, let us look around the universe in a similar way. What will catch our magically enhanced eye? In a single universe the most striking structures are galaxies and clusters of galaxies. But those objects have no discernible structure across the multiverse. Where there is a galaxy in one universe, a myriad galaxies with quite different geographies are stacked in the multiverse. And so it is everywhere in the multiverse. Nearby universes are alike only in certain gross features, as required by the laws of physics, which apply to them all. Thus most stars are quite accurately spherical everywhere in the multiverse, and most galaxies are spiral or elliptical. But nothing extends far into other universes without its detailed structure changing unrecognizably. Except, that is, in those few places where there is embodied knowledge. In such places, objects extend recognizably across large numbers of universes. Perhaps the Earth is the only such place in our universe, at present. In any case, such places stand out, in the sense I have described, as the location of the processes — life, and thought — that have generated the largest distinctive structures in the multiverse.
