# 9 - Quantum Computers

**9**
**Quantum Computers**
To anyone new to the subject, *quantum computation* sounds like the name of a new technology — the latest, perhaps, in the remarkable succession that has included mechanical computation, transistorized electronic computation, silicon-chip computation, and so on. And it is true that even existing computer technology relies on microscopic quantum-mechanical processes. (Of course *all* physical processes are quantum-mechanical, but here I mean ones for which classical physics — i.e. non-quantum physics — gives very inaccurate predictions.) If the trend towards ever faster, more compact computer hardware is to continue, the technology must become even more ‘quantum-mechanical’ in this sense, simply because quantum-mechanical effects are dominant in all sufficiently small systems. If there were no more to it than that, quantum computation could hardly figure in any fundamental explanation of the fabric of reality, for there would be nothing fundamentally new in it. All present-day computers, whatever quantum-mechanical processes they may exploit, are merely different technological implementations of the same *classical* idea, that of the universal Turing machine. That is why the repertoire of computations available to all existing computers is essentially the same: they differ only in their speed, memory capacity and input — output devices. That is to say, even the lowliest of today’s home computers can be programmed to solve any problem, or render any environment, that our most powerful computers can, provided only that it is given additional memory, allowed to run for long enough, and given appropriate hardware for displaying its results.
Quantum computation is more than just a faster, more miniaturized technology for implementing Turing machines. A *quantum computer* is a machine that uses uniquely quantum-mechanical effects, especially interference, to perform wholly new types of computation that would be impossible, even in principle, on any Turing machine and hence on any classical computer. Quantum computation is therefore nothing less than a distinctively new way of harnessing nature.
Let me elaborate that claim. The earliest inventions for harnessing nature were tools powered by human muscles. They revolutionized our ancestors’ situation, but they suffered from the limitation that they required continuous human attention and effort during every moment of their use. Subsequent technology overcame that limitation: human beings managed to domesticate certain animals and plants, turning the biological adaptations in those organisms to human ends. Thus the crops could grow, and the guard dogs could watch, even while their owners slept. Another new type of technology began when human beings went beyond merely exploiting existing adaptations (and existing non-biological phenomena such as fire), and created completely new adaptations in the world, in the form of pottery, bricks, wheels, metal artefacts and machines. To do this they had to think about, and understand, the natural laws governing the world — including, as I have explained, not only its superficial aspects but the underlying fabric of reality. There followed thousands of years of progress in this type of technology — harnessing some of the *materials, forces* and *energies* of physics. In the twentieth century *information* was added to this list when the invention of computers allowed complex information processing to be performed outside human brains. *Quantum* computation, which is now in its early infancy, is a distinct further step in this progression. It will be the first technology that allows useful tasks to be performed in collaboration between parallel universes. A quantum computer would be capable of distributing components of a complex task among vast numbers of parallel universes, and then sharing the results.
I have already mentioned the significance of computational  universality — the fact that a single physically possible computer can, given enough time and memory, perform any computation that any other physically possible computer can perform. The laws of physics as we currently know them do admit computational universality. However, to be at all useful or significant in the overall scheme of things, universality as I have defined it up to now is not sufficient. It merely means that the universal computer can *eventually* do what any other computer can. In other words, *given enough time* it is universal. But what if it is not given enough time? Imagine a universal computer that could execute only one computational step in the whole lifetime of the universe. Would *its* universality still be a profound property of reality? Presumably not. To put that more generally, one can criticize this narrow notion of universality because it classifies a task as being in a computer’s repertoire regardless of the physical resources that the computer would expend in performing the task. Thus, for instance, we have considered a virtual-reality user who is prepared to go into suspended animation for billions of years, while the computer calculates what to show next. In discussing the ultimate limits of virtual reality, that is the appropriate attitude for us to take. But when we are considering the *usefulness* of virtual reality — or what is even more important, the fundamental role that it plays in the fabric of reality — we must be more discriminating. Evolution would never have got off the ground if the task of rendering certain properties of the earliest, simplest habitats had not been *tractable* (that is, computable in a reasonable time) using readily available molecules as computers. Likewise, science and technology would never have got off the ground if designing a stone tool had required a thousand years of thinking. Moreover, what was true at the beginning has remained an absolute condition for progress at every step. Computational universality would not be much use to genes, no matter how much knowledge they contained, if rendering their organism were an intractable task — say, if one reproductive cycle took billions of years.
Thus the fact that there *are* complex organisms, and that there *has* been a succession of gradually improving inventions and scientific theories (such as Galilean mechanics, Newtonian mechanics, Einsteinian mechanics, quantum mechanics, . . .) tells us something more about what sort of computational universality exists in reality. It tells us that the actual laws of physics are, thus far at least, capable of being successively approximated by theories that give ever better explanations and predictions, and that the task of discovering each theory, given the previous one, has been computationally tractable, given the previously known laws and the previously available technology. The fabric of reality must be, as it were, *layered,* for easy self-access. Likewise, if we think of evolution itself as a computation, it tells us that there have been sufficiently many viable organisms, coded for by DNA, to allow better-adapted ones to be computed (i.e. to evolve) using the resources provided by their worse-adapted predecessors. So we can infer that the laws of physics, in addition to mandating their own comprehensibility through the Turing principle, ensure that the corresponding evolutionary processes, such as life and thought, are neither too time-consuming nor require too many resources of any other kind to occur in reality.
So, the laws of physics not only permit (or, as I have argued, *require*) the existence of life and thought, they require them to be, in some appropriate sense, efficient. To express this crucial property of reality, modern analyses of universality usually postulate computers that are universal in an even stronger sense than the Turing principle would, on the face of it, require: not only are universal virtual-reality generators possible, it is possible to build them so that they do not require impracticably large resources to render simple aspects of reality. From now on, when I refer to universality I shall mean it in this sense, unless otherwise stated.
Just how efficiently can given aspects of reality be rendered? What computations, in other words, are practicable in a given time and under a given budget? This is the basic question of computational complexity theory which, as I have said, is the study of the resources that are required to perform given computational tasks. Complexity theory has not yet been sufficiently well integrated with physics to give many quantitative answers. However,  it has made a fair amount of headway in defining a useful, rough-and-ready distinction between *tractable* and *intractable* computational tasks. The general approach is best illustrated by an example. Consider the task of multiplying together two rather large numbers, say 4,220,851 and 2,594,209. Many of us remember the method we learned in childhood for performing such multiplications. It involves multiplying each digit of one number in turn by each digit of the other, while shifting and adding the results together in a standard way to give the final answer, in this case 10,949,769,651,859. Many might be loath to concede that this wearisome procedure makes multiplication ‘tractable’ in any ordinary sense of the word. (Actually there are more efficient methods for multiplying large numbers, but this one provides a good enough illustration.) But from the point of view of complexity theory, which deals in massive tasks carried out by computers that are not subject to boredom and almost never make mistakes, this method certainly does fall into the ‘tractable’ category.
What counts for ‘tractability’, according to the standard definitions, is not the actual time taken to multiply a particular pair of numbers, but the fact that the time does not increase too sharply when we apply the same method to ever larger numbers. Perhaps surprisingly, this rather indirect way of defining tractability works very well in practice for many (though not all) important classes of computational tasks. For example, with multiplication we can easily see that the standard method can be used to multiply numbers that are, say, about ten times as large, with very little extra work. Suppose, for the sake of argument, that each elementary multiplication of one digit by another takes a certain computer one microsecond (including the time taken to perform the additions, shifts and other operations that follow each elementary multiplication). When we are multiplying the seven-digit numbers 4,220,851 and 2,594,209, each of the seven digits in 4,220,851 has to be multiplied by each of the seven digits in 2,594,209. So the total time required for the multiplication (if the operations are performed sequentially) will be seven times seven, or 49 microseconds. For inputs roughly ten times as large as these, which would have eight digits each, the  time required to multiply them would be 64 microseconds, an increase of only 31 per cent.
Clearly, numbers over a huge range — certainly including any numbers that have ever been measured as the values of physical variables — can be multiplied in a tiny fraction of a second. So multiplication is indeed tractable for all purposes within physics (or, at least, within existing physics). Admittedly, practical reasons for multiplying much larger numbers can arise outside physics. For instance, products of prime numbers of 125 digits or so are of great interest to cryptographers. Our hypothetical machine could multiply two such prime numbers together, making a 250-digit product, in just over a hundredth of a second. In one second it could multiply two 1000-digit numbers, and real computers available today can easily improve upon those timings. Only a few researchers in esoteric branches of pure mathematics are interested in performing such incomprehensibly vast multiplications, yet we see that even they have no reason to regard multiplication as intractable.
By contrast, *factorization,* essentially the reverse of multiplication, seems much more difficult. One starts with a single number as input, say 10,949,769,651,859, and the task is to find two factors - smaller numbers which when multiplied together make 10,949,769,651,859. Since we have just multiplied them, we know that the answer in this case is 4,220,851 and 2,594,209 (and since those are both primes, it is the only correct answer). But without such inside knowledge, how would we have found the factors? You will search your childhood memories in vain for an easy method, for there isn’t one.
The most obvious method of factorization is to divide the input number by all possible factors, starting with 2 and continuing with every odd number, until one of them divides the input exactly. At least one of the factors (assuming the input is not a prime) can be no larger than the input’s square root, and that provides an estimate of how long the method might take. In the case we are considering, our computer would find the smaller of the two factors, 2,594,209, in just over a second. However, an input ten times as large would  have a square root that was about three times as large, so factorizing it by this method would take up to three times as long. In other words, adding one digit to the input would now *triple* the running time. Adding another would triple it again, and so on. So the running time would increase in geometrical proportion, that is, exponentially, with the number of digits in the number we are factorizing. Factorizing a number with 25-digit factors by this method would occupy all the computers on Earth for centuries.
The method can be improved upon, but *all* methods of factorization currently in use have this exponential-increase property. The largest number that has been factorized ‘in anger’, as it were — a number whose factors were secretly chosen by mathematicians in order to present a challenge to other mathematicians — had 129 digits. The factorization was achieved, after an appeal on the Internet, by a global cooperative effort involving thousands of computers. The computer scientist Donald Knuth has estimated that the factorization of a 250-digit number, using the most efficient known methods, would take over a million years on a network of a million computers. Such things are difficult to estimate, but even if Knuth is being too pessimistic one need only consider numbers with a few more digits and the task will be made many times harder. This is what we mean by saying that the factorization of large numbers is intractable. All this is a far cry from multiplication where, as we have seen, the task of multiplying a pair of 250-digit numbers is a triviality on anyone’s home computer. No one can even conceive of how one might factorize thousand-digit numbers, or million-digit numbers.
At least, no one *could* conceive of it, until recently.
In 1982 the physicist Richard Feynman considered the computer simulation of quantum-mechanical objects. His starting-point was something that had already been known for some time without its significance being appreciated, namely that predicting the behaviour of quantum-mechanical systems (or, as we can describe it, rendering quantum-mechanical environments in virtual reality) is in general an intractable task. One reason why the significance of this had not been appreciated is that no one expected the computer prediction of interesting physical phenomena to be especially easy. Take weather  forecasting or earthquake prediction, for instance. Although the relevant equations are known, the difficulty of applying them in realistic situations is notorious. This has recently been brought to public attention in popular books and articles on *chaos* and the ‘butterfly effect’. These effects are not responsible for the intractability that Feynman had in mind, for the simple reason that they occur only in classical physics — that is, not in reality, since reality is quantum-mechanical. Nevertheless, I want to make some remarks here about ‘chaotic’ classical motions, if only to highlight the quite different characters of classical and quantum unpredictability.
Chaos theory is about limitations on predictability in classical physics, stemming from the fact that almost all classical systems are inherently unstable. The ‘instability’ in question has nothing to do with any tendency to behave violently or disintegrate. It is about an extreme sensitivity to initial conditions. Suppose that we know the present state of some physical system, such as a set of billiard balls rolling on a table. If the system obeyed classical physics, as it does to a good approximation, we should then be able to determine its future behaviour — say, whether a particular ball will go into a pocket or not — from the relevant laws of motion, just as we can predict an eclipse or a planetary conjunction from the same laws. But in practice we are never able to measure the initial positions and velocities perfectly. So the question arises, if we know them to some reasonable degree of accuracy, can we also predict to a reasonable degree of accuracy how they will behave in the future? And the answer is, usually, that we cannot. The difference between the real trajectory and the predicted trajectory, calculated from slightly inaccurate data, tends to grow exponentially and irregularly (‘chaotically’) with time, so that after a while the original, slightly imperfectly known state is no guide at all to what the system is doing. The implication for computer prediction is that planetary motions, the epitome of classical predictability, are untypical classical systems. In order to predict what a typical classical system will do after only a moderate period, one would have to determine its initial state to an impossibly high precision. Thus it is said that in principle, the flap of a butterfly’s wing in  one hemisphere of the planet could cause a hurricane in the other hemisphere. The infeasibility of weather forecasting and the like is then attributed to the impossibility of accounting for every butterfly on the planet.
However, real hurricanes and real butterflies obey quantum theory, not classical mechanics. The instability that would rapidly amplify slight mis-specifications of an initial classical state is simply not a feature of quantum-mechanical systems. In quantum mechanics, small deviations from a specified initial state tend to cause only small deviations from the predicted final state. Instead, accurate prediction is made difficult by quite a different effect.
The laws of quantum mechanics require an object that is initially at a given position (in all universes) to ‘spread out’ in the multiverse sense. For instance, a photon and its other-universe counterparts all start from the same point on a glowing filament, but then move in trillions of different directions. When we later make a measurement of what has happened, we too become differentiated as each copy of us sees what has happened in our particular universe. If the object in question is the Earth’s atmosphere, then a hurricane may have occurred in 30 per cent of universes, say, and not in the remaining 70 per cent. Subjectively we perceive this as a single, unpredictable or ‘random’ outcome, though from the multiverse point of view all the outcomes have actually happened. This parallel-universe multiplicity is the real reason for the unpredictability of the weather. Our inability to measure the initial conditions accurately is completely irrelevant. Even if we knew the initial conditions perfectly, the multiplicity, and therefore the unpredictability of the motion, would remain. And on the other hand, in contrast to the classical case, an imaginary multiverse with only slightly different initial conditions would not behave very differently from the real multiverse: it might suffer hurricanes in 30.000 001 per cent of its universes and not in the remaining 69.999 999 per cent.
The flapping of butterflies’ wings does not, in reality, cause hurricanes because the classical phenomenon of chaos depends on perfect determinism, which does not hold in any single universe. Consider a group of identical universes at an instant at which, in all of them,  a particular butterfly’s wings have flapped up. Consider a second group of universes which at the same instant are identical to the first group, except that in them the butterfly’s wings are down. Wait for a few hours. Quantum mechanics predicts that, unless there are exceptional circumstances (such as someone watching the butterfly and pressing a button to detonate a nuclear bomb if it flaps its wings), the two groups of universes, nearly identical at first, are still nearly identical. But each group, within itself, has become greatly differentiated. It includes universes with hurricanes, universes without hurricanes, and even a very tiny number of universes in which the butterfly has spontaneously changed its species through an accidental rearrangement of all its atoms, or the Sun has exploded because all its atoms bounced by chance towards the nuclear reaction at its core. Even so, the two groups still resemble each other very closely. In the universes in which the butterfly raised its wings and hurricanes occurred, those hurricanes were indeed unpredictable; but the butterfly was not causally responsible, for there were near-identical hurricanes in universes where everything else was the same but the wings were lowered.
It is perhaps worth stressing the distinction between *unpredictability* and *intractability.* Unpredictability has nothing to do with the available computational resources. Classical systems are unpredictable (or would be, if they existed) because of their sensitivity to initial conditions. Quantum systems do not have that sensitivity, but are unpredictable because they behave differently in different universes, and so appear random in most universes. In neither case will any amount of computation lessen the unpredictability. Intractability, by contrast, is a computational-resource issue. It refers to a situation where we could readily make the prediction if only we could perform the required computation, but we cannot do so because the resources required are impractically large. In order to disentangle the problems of unpredictability from those of intractability in quantum mechanics, we have to consider quantum systems that are, in principle, predictable.
Quantum theory is often presented as making only probabilistic predictions. For example, in the perforated-barrier-and-screen type  of interference experiment described in Chapter 2, the photon can be observed to arrive anywhere in the ‘bright’ part of the shadow pattern. But it is important to understand that for many other experiments quantum theory predicts a single, definite outcome. In other words, it predicts that all universes will end up with the same outcome, even if the universes differed at intermediate stages of the experiment, and it predicts what that outcome will be. In such cases we observe *non-random interference phenomena*. An interferometer can demonstrate such phenomena. This is an optical instrument that consists mainly of mirrors, both conventional mirrors (Figure 9.1) and semi-silvered mirrors (as used in conjuring tricks and police stations and shown in Figure 9.2). If a photon strikes a semi-silvered mirror, then in half the universes it bounces off just as it would from a conventional mirror. But in the other half, it passes through as if nothing were there.
[Image: 019]
**FIGURE 9.1** *The action of a normal mirror is the same in all universes.*
[Image: 020]
**FIGURE 9.2** *A semi-silvered mirror makes initially identical universes differentiate into two equal groups, differing only in the path taken by a single photon.*
 
A single photon enters the interferometer at the top left, as shown in Figure 9.3. In all the universes in which the experiment is done, the photon and its counterparts are travelling towards the interferometer along the same path. These universes are therefore identical. But as soon as the photon strikes the semi-silvered mirror, the initially identical universes become differentiated. In half of them, the photon passes straight through and travels along the top side of the interferometer. In the remaining universes, it bounces off the mirror and travels down the left side of the interferometer. The versions of the photon in these two groups of universes then strike and bounce off the ordinary mirrors at the top right and bottom left respectively. Thus they end up arriving simultaneously at the semi-silvered mirror on the bottom right, and interfere with one another. Remember that we have allowed only one photon into the apparatus, and in each universe there is still only one photon in there. In all universes, that photon has now struck the bottom-right mirror. In half of them it has struck it from the left, and in the other half it has struck it from above. The versions of the photon in these two groups of universes interfere strongly. The net effect depends on the exact geometry of the situation, but Figure 9.3 shows the case where in all universes the photon ends up taking the rightward-pointing path through the mirror, and in no universe is it transmitted or reflected downwards. Thus all the universes are identical at the end of the experiment, just as they were at the beginning. They were differentiated, and interfered with one another, only for a minute fraction of a second in between.
[Image: 021]
**FIGURE 9.3** *A single photon passing through an interferometer. The positions of the mirrors (conventional mirrors shown black, semi-silvered mirrors grey) can be adjusted so that interference between two versions of the photon (in different universes) makes both versions take the same exit route from the lower semi-silvered mirror.*
 
This remarkable non-random interference phenomenon is just as inescapable a piece of evidence for the existence of the multiverse as is the phenomenon of shadows. For the outcome that I have described is incompatible with *either* of the two possible paths that a particle in a single universe might have taken. If we project a photon rightwards along the lower arm of the interferometer, for instance, it *may* pass through the semi-silvered mirror like the photon in the interference experiment does. But it may not — sometimes it is deflected downwards. Likewise, a photon projected downwards along the right arm may be deflected rightwards, as in the interference experiment, or it may just travel straight down. Thus, whichever path you set a single photon on *inside* the apparatus, it will emerge randomly. Only when interference occurs between the two paths is the outcome predictable. It follows that what is present in the apparatus just before the end of the interference experiment cannot be a single photon on a single path: it cannot, for instance, be just a photon travelling on the lower arm. There must be something else present, preventing it from bouncing downwards. Nor can there be just a photon travelling on the right arm; again, something else must be there, preventing it from travelling straight down, as it sometimes would if it were there by itself. Just as with shadows, we can construct further experiments to show that the ‘something else’ has all the properties of a photon that travels along the other path and interferes with the photon we see, but with nothing else in our universe.
Since there are only two different kinds of universe in this experiment, the calculation of what will happen takes only about twice as long as it would if the particle obeyed classical laws — say, if  we were computing the path of a billard ball. A factor of two will hardly make such computations intractable. However, we have already seen that multiplicity of a much larger degree is fairly easy to achieve. In the shadow experiments, a single photon passes through a barrier in which there are some small holes, and then falls on a screen. Suppose that there are a thousand holes in the barrier. There are places on the screen where the photon can fall (*does* fall, in some universes), and places where it cannot fall. To calculate whether a particular point on the screen can or cannot ever receive the photon, we must calculate the mutual interference effects of a thousand parallel-universe versions of the photon. Specifically, we have to calculate one thousand paths from the barrier to the given point on the screen, and then calculate the effects of those photons on each other so as to determine whether or not they are all prevented from reaching that point. Thus we must perform roughly a thousand times as much computation as we would if we were working out whether a classical particle would strike the specified point or not.
The complexity of this sort of computation shows us that there is a lot more happening in a quantum-mechanical environment than — literally — meets the eye. And I have argued, expressing Dr Johnson’s criterion for reality in terms of computational complexity, that this complexity is the core reason why it does not make sense to deny the existence of the rest of the multiverse. But far higher multiplicities are possible when there are two or more interacting particles involved in an interference phenomenon. Suppose that each of two interacting particles has (say) a thousand paths open to it. The pair can then be in a million different states at an intermediate stage of the experiment, so there can be up to a million universes that differ in what this *pair* of particles is doing. If three particles were interacting, the number of different universes could be a billion; for four, a trillion; and so on. Thus the number of different histories that we have to calculate if we want to predict what will happen in such cases increases exponentially with the number of interacting particles. That is why the task of computing how a typical quantum system will behave is well and truly intractable.
This is the intractability that was exercising Feynman. We see that it has nothing to do with unpredictability: on the contrary, it is most clearly manifested in quantum phenomena that are highly predictable. That is because in such phenomena the same, definite outcome occurs in all universes, but that outcome is the result of interference between vast numbers of universes that were different during the experiment. All this is in principle predictable from quantum theory and is not overly sensitive to the initial conditions. What makes it hard to *predict* that in such experiments the outcome will always be the same is that doing so requires inordinately large amounts of computation.
Intractability is in principle a greater impediment to universality than unpredictability could ever be. I have already said that a perfectly accurate rendering of a roulette wheel need not — indeed should not — give the same sequence of numbers as the real one. Similarly, we cannot prepare in advance a virtual-reality rendering of tomorrow’s weather. But we can (or shall, one day, be able to) make a rendering of *weather* which, though not the same as the real weather conditions prevailing on any historical day, is nevertheless so realistic in its behaviour that no user, however expert, will be able to distinguish it from genuine weather. The same is true of any environment that does not show the effects of quantum interference (which means most environments). Rendering such an environment in virtual reality is a tractable computational task. However, it would appear that no practical rendering is possible for environments that do show the effects of quantum interference. Without performing exponentially large amounts of computation, how can we be sure that in those cases our rendered environment will not do things which the real environment strictly never does, because of some interference phenomenon?
It might seem natural to conclude that reality does not, after all, display genuine computational universality, because interference phenomena cannot be usefully rendered. Feynman, however, correctly drew the opposite conclusion! Instead of regarding the intractability of the task of rendering quantum phenomena as an obstacle, Feynman regarded it as an opportunity. If it requires so much  computation to work out what will happen in an interference experiment, then the very act of setting up such an experiment and measuring its outcome is tantamount to performing a complex computation. Thus, Feynman reasoned, it might after all be possible to render quantum environments efficiently, provided the computer were allowed to perform experiments on a real quantum-mechanical object. The computer would choose what measurements to make on an auxiliary piece of quantum hardware as it went along, and would incorporate the results of the measurements into its computations.
The auxiliary quantum hardware would in effect be a computer too. For example, an interferometer could act as such a device and, like any other physical object, it can be thought of as a computer. We would nowadays call it a *special-purpose quantum computer*. We ‘program’ it by setting up the mirrors in a certain geometry, and then projecting a single photon at the first mirror. In a non-random interference experiment the photon will always emerge in one particular direction, determined by the settings of the mirrors, and we could interpret that direction as indicating the result of the computation. In a more complex experiment, with several interacting particles, such a computation could easily, as I have explained, become ‘intractable’. Yet since we could readily obtain its result just by performing this experiment, it is not really intractable after all. We must now be more careful with our terminology. Evidently there are computational tasks that are ‘intractable’ if we attempt to perform them using any existing computer, but which would be tractable if we were to use quantum-mechanical objects as special-purpose computers. (Notice that the fact that quantum phenomena can be used to perform computations in this way depends on their not being subject to chaos. If the outcome of computations were an inordinately sensitive function of the initial state, ‘programming’ the device by setting it in a suitable initial state would be an impossibly difficult task.)
Using a quantum auxiliary device in this way might be considered cheating, since *any* environment is obviously much easier to render if one has access to a spare copy of it to measure during the  rendering! However, Feynman conjectured that it would not be necessary to use a literal copy of the environment being rendered: that it would be possible to find a much more easily constructed auxiliary device whose interference properties were nevertheless analogous to those of the target environment. Then a normal computer could do the rest of the rendering, working through the analogy between the auxiliary device and the target environment. And, Feynman expected, that would be a tractable task. Furthermore, he conjectured, correctly as it turned out, that all the quantum-mechanical properties of any target environment could be simulated by auxiliary devices of a particular type that he specified (namely an array of spinning atoms, each interacting with its neighbours). He called the whole class of such devices a *universal quantum simulator*.
But it was not a single machine, as it would have to be in order to qualify as a universal computer. The interactions that the simulator’s atoms would have to undergo could not be fixed once and for all, as in a universal computer, but would have to be re-engineered for the simulation of each target environment. But the point of universality is that it should be possible to program a single machine, specified once and for all, to perform any possible computation, or render any physically possible environment. In 1985 I proved that under quantum physics there is a *universal quantum computer*. The proof was fairly straightforward. All I had to do was mimic Turing’s constructions, but using quantum theory to define the underlying physics instead of the classical mechanics that Turing had implicitly assumed. A universal quantum computer could perform any computation that any other quantum computer (or any Turing-type computer) could perform, and it could render any finite physically possible environment in virtual reality. Moreover, it has since been shown that the time and other resources that it would need to do these things would not increase exponentially with the size or detail of the environment being rendered, so the relevant computations would be tractable by the standards of complexity theory.
The classical theory of computation, which was the unchallenged  foundation of computing for half a century, is now obsolete except, like the rest of classical physics, as an approximation scheme. *The* theory of computation is now the quantum theory of computation. I said that Turing had implicitly used ‘classical mechanics’ in his construction. But with the benefit of hindsight we can now see that even the classical theory of computation did not fully conform to classical physics, and contained strong adumbrations of quantum theory. It is no coincidence that the word *bit*, meaning the smallest possible amount of information that a computer can manipulate, means essentially the same as *quantum*, a discrete chunk. Discrete variables (variables that cannot take a continuous range of values) are alien to classical physics. For example, if a variable has only two possible values, say 0 and 1, how does it ever get from 0 to 1? (I asked this question in Chapter 2.) In classical physics it would have to jump discontinuously, which is incompatible with how forces and motions work in classical mechanics. In quantum physics, no discontinuous change is necessary — even though all measurable quantities are discrete. It works as follows.
Let us start by imagining some parallel universes stacked like a pack of cards, with the pack as a whole representing the multiverse. (Such a model, in which the universes are arranged in a sequence, greatly understates the complexity of the multiverse, but it suffices to illustrate my point here.) Now let us alter the model to take account of the fact that the multiverse is not a discrete set of universes but a continuum, and that not all the universes are different. In fact, for each universe that is present there is also a continuum of identical universes present, comprising a certain tiny but non-zero proportion of the multiverse. In our model, this proportion may be represented by the thickness of a card, where each card now represents all the universes of a given type. However, unlike the thickness of a card, the proportion of each type of universe changes with time under quantum-mechanical laws of motion. Consequently, the proportion of universes having a given property also changes, and it changes continuously. In the case of a discrete variable changing from 0 to 1, suppose that the variable has the value 0 in all universes before the change begins, and that  after the change, it has the value 1 in all universes. During the change, the proportion of universes in which the value is 0 falls smoothly from 100 per cent to zero, and the proportion in which the value is 1 rises correspondingly from zero to 100 per cent. Figure 9.4 shows a multiverse view of such a change.
It might seem from Figure 9.4 that, although the transition from 0 to 1 is objectively continuous from the multiverse perspective, it remains subjectively discontinuous from the point of view of any individual universe — as represented, say, by a horizontal line halfway up Figure 9.4. However, that is merely a limitation of the diagram, and not a real feature of what is happening. Although the diagram makes it seem that there is at each instant a particular universe that ‘has just changed’ from 0 to 1 because it has just ‘crossed the boundary’, that is not really so. It cannot be, because such a universe is strictly identical with every other universe in which the bit has value 1 at that time. So if the inhabitants of one of them were experiencing a discontinuous change, then so would the inhabitants of all the others. Therefore none of them can have such an experience. Note also that, as I shall explain in Chapter 11, the idea of anything *moving* across a diagram such as Figure 9.4, in which time is already represented, is simply a mistake. At each instant the bit has value 1 in a certain proportion of universes and 0 in another. All those universes, at all those times, are already shown in Figure 9.4. They are not moving anywhere!
[Image: 022]
**FIGURE 9.4** *Multiverse view of how a bit changes continuously from 0 to 1.*
 
Another way in which quantum physics is implicit in classical computation is that all practical implementations of Turing-type computers rely on such things as solid matter or magnetized materials, which could not exist in the absence of quantum-mechanical effects. For example, any solid body consists of an array of atoms, which are themselves composed of electrically charged particles (electrons, and protons in the nuclei). But because of classical chaos, no array of charged particles could be stable under classical laws of motion. The positively and negatively charged particles would simply move out of position and crash into each other, and the structure would disintegrate. It is only the strong quantum interference between the various paths taken by charged particles in parallel universes that prevents such catastrophes and makes solid matter possible.
Building a universal quantum computer is well beyond present technology. As I have said, detecting an interference phenomenon always involves setting up an appropriate interaction between *all* the variables that have been different in the universes that contribute to the interference. The more interacting particles are involved, therefore, the harder it tends to be to engineer the interaction that would display the interference — that is, the result of the computation. Among the many technical difficulties of working at the level of a single atom or single electron, one of the most important is that of preventing the environment from being affected by the different interfering sub-computations. For if a group of atoms is undergoing an interference phenomenon, and they differentially affect other atoms in the environment, then the interference can no longer be detected by measurements of the original group alone, and the group is no longer performing any useful quantum computation. This is called *decoherence.* I must add that this problem is often presented the wrong way round: we are told that ‘quantum interference is a very delicate process, and must be shielded from all outside influences’. This is wrong. Outside influences could cause minor imperfections, but it is the effect of the quantum computation on the outside world that causes decoherence.
Thus the race is on to engineer sub-microscopic systems in which  information-carrying variables interact among themselves, but affect their environment as little as possible. Another novel simplification, unique to the quantum theory of computation, partly offsets the difficulties caused by decoherence. It turns out that, unlike classical computation, where one needs to engineer specific classical logic elements such as AND, or and NOT, the precise form of the interactions hardly matters in the quantum case. Virtually any atomic-scale system of interacting bits, so long as it does not decohere, could be made to perform useful quantum computations.
Interference phenomena involving vast numbers of particles, such as superconductivity and superfluidity, are known, but it seems that none of them can be used to perform any interesting computations. At the time of writing, only single-bit quantum computations can be easily performed in the laboratory. Experimentalists are confident, however, that two- and higher-bit *quantum gates* (the quantum equivalent of the classical logical elements) will be constructed within the next few years. These are the basic components of quantum computers. Some physicists, notably Rolf Landauer of IBM Research, are pessimistic about the prospects for further advances after that. They believe that decoherence will never be reduced to the point where more than a few consecutive quantum-computational steps can be performed. Most researchers in the field are much more optimistic (though perhaps that is because only optimistic researchers choose to work on quantum computation!). Some special-purpose quantum computers have already been built (see below), and my own opinion is that more complex ones will appear in a matter of years rather than decades. As for the universal quantum computer, I expect that its construction too is only a matter of time, though I should not like to predict whether that time will be decades or centuries.
The fact that the repertoire of the universal quantum computer contains environments whose rendering is classically intractable implies that new classes of purely mathematical computations must have become tractable too. For the laws of physics are, as Galileo said, expressed in mathematical language, and rendering an environment is tantamount to evaluating certain mathematical  functions. And indeed, many mathematical tasks have now been discovered which could be efficiently performed by quantum computation where all known classical methods are intractable. The most spectacular of these is the task of factorizing large numbers. The method, known as *Shor’s algorithm,* was discovered in 1994 by Peter Shor of Bell Laboratories. (While this book was in proof further spectacular quantum algorithms have been discovered, including *Grover’s algorithm* for searching long lists very rapidly.)
Shor’s algorithm is extraordinarily simple and requires far more modest hardware than would be needed for a universal quantum computer. It is likely, therefore, that a *quantum factorization engine* will be built long before the full range of quantum computations is technologically feasible. This is a prospect of great significance for *cryptography* (the science of securely communicating and authenticating information). Realistic communication networks may be global and have large, constantly changing sets of participants with unpredictable patterns of communication. It is impractical to require every pair of participants, physically and in advance, to exchange secret cryptographic keys that would allow them later to communicate without fear of eavesdroppers. *Public-key cryptography* is any method of sending secret information where the sender and recipient do not already share any secret information. The most secure known method of public-key cryptography depends on the intractability of the problem of factorizing large numbers. This method is known as the RSA cryptosystem, named after Ronald Rivest, Adi Shamir and Leonard Adelman, who first proposed it in 1978. It depends on a mathematical procedure whereby a message can be encoded using a large (say, 250-digit) number as a key. The recipient can freely make this key public, because any message encoded with it can only be decoded given a knowledge of the factors of that number. Thus I can choose two 125-digit prime numbers and keep them secret, but multiply them together and make their 250-digit product public. Anyone can send me a message using that number as the key, but only I can read the messages because only I know the secret factors.
As I have said, there is no practical prospect of factorizing  250-digit numbers by classical means. But a quantum factorization engine running Shor’s algorithm could do it using only a few thousand arithmetic operations, which might well take only a matter of minutes. So anyone with access to such a machine would easily be able to read any intercepted message that had been encrypted using the RSA cryptosystem.
It would do the cryptographers no good to choose larger numbers as keys because the resources required by Shor’s algorithm increase only slowly with the size of the number being factorized. In the quantum theory of computation, factorization is a very tractable task. It is thought that, in the presence of a given level of decoherence, there would again be a practical limit on the size of number that could be factorized, but there is no known lower limit on the rate of decoherence that can be technologically achieved. So we must conclude that one day in the future, at a time that cannot now be predicted, the RSA cryptosystem with any given length of key may become insecure. In a certain sense, that makes it insecure even today. For anyone, or any organization, that records an RSA-encrypted message today, and waits until they can buy a quantum factorization engine with low enough decoherence, will be able to decode the message. That may not happen for centuries, or it may be only decades — perhaps less, who can tell? But the likelihood that it will be rather a long time is all that now remains of the former complete security of the RSA system.
When a quantum factorization engine is factorizing a 250-digit number, the number of interfering universes will be of the order of 10^500 — that is, ten to the power of 500. This staggeringly large number is the reason why Shor’s algorithm makes factorization tractable. I said that the algorithm requires only a few thousand arithmetic operations. I meant, of course, a few thousand operations *in each universe* that contributes to the answer. All those computations are performed in parallel, in different universes, and share their results through interference.
You may be wondering how we can persuade our counterparts in 10^500-odd universes to start working on our factorization task. Will they not have their own agendas for the use of their computers?  No — and no persuasion is necessary. Shor’s algorithm operates initially only on a set of universes that are *identical* to one another, and it causes them to become differentiated only within the confines of the factorization engine. So we, who specified the number to be factorized, and who wait while the answer is computed, are identical in all the interfering universes. There are, no doubt, many other universes in which we programmed different numbers or never built the factorization engine at all. But those universes differ from ours in too many variables — or more precisely, in variables that are not made to interact in the right way by the programming of Shor’s algorithm — and so do not interfere with our universe.
The argument of Chapter 2, applied to *any* interference phenomenon destroys the classical idea that there is only one universe. Logically, the possibility of complex quantum computations adds nothing to a case that is already unanswerable. But it does add psychological impact. With Shor’s algorithm, the argument has been writ very large. To those who still cling to a single-universe world-view, I issue this challenge: *explain how Shor’s algorithm works.* I do not merely mean predict that it will work, which is merely a matter of solving a few uncontroversial equations. I mean provide an explanation. When Shor’s algorithm has factorized a number, using 10^500 or so times the computational resources that can be seen to be present, where was the number factorized? There are only about 10^80 atoms in the entire visible universe, an utterly minuscule number compared with 10^500. So if the visible universe were the extent of physical reality, physical reality would not even remotely contain the resources required to factorize such a large number. Who did factorize it, then? How, and where, was the computation performed?
I have been discussing traditional types of mathematical task that quantum computers would be able to perform more quickly than existing machines. But there is an additional class of new tasks open to quantum computers that no classical computer could perform at all. By a strange coincidence, one of the first of these tasks to be discovered also concerns public-key cryptography. This time it is not a matter of breaking an existing system, but of  implementing a new, absolutely secure system of *quantum cryptography.* In 1989, at IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, New York, in the office of the theoretician Charles Bennett, the first working quantum computer was built. It was a special-purpose quantum computer consisting of a pair of quantum cryptographic devices designed by Bennett and Gilles Brassard of the University of Montreal. It became the first machine ever to perform non-trivial computations that no Turing machine could perform.
In Bennett and Brassard’s quantum cryptosystem, messages are encoded in the states of individual photons emitted by a laser. Although many photons are needed to transmit a message (one photon per bit, plus many more photons wasted in various inefficiencies), the machines can be built with existing technology because they need to perform their quantum computations on only one photon at a time. The system’s security is based not on intractability, either classical or quantum, but directly on the properties of quantum interference: that is what gives it its classically unobtainable absolute security. No amount of future computation by any sort of computer, whether for millions or trillions of years, would be of any help to an eavesdropper on quantum-encrypted messages: for if one communicates through a medium exhibiting interference, *one can detect eavesdroppers*. According to classical physics, there is nothing that can prevent an eavesdropper who has physical access to a communication medium, such as a telephone line, from installing a passive listening device. But, as I have explained, if one makes any measurement on a quantum system, one alters its subsequent interference properties. The communication protocol relies on this effect. The communicating parties effectively set up repeated interference experiments, co-ordinating them over a public communication channel. Only if the interference passes the test for there having been no eavesdropper do they pass on to the next stage of the protocol, which is to use some of the transmitted information as a cryptographic key. At worst, a persistent eavesdropper might prevent any communication from taking place at all (though of course that is more easily achieved just by cutting the telephone line). But as for reading a message,  only the intended recipient can do that, and the guarantee of that is provided by the laws of physics.
Because quantum cryptography depends on manipulating individual photons, it suffers from a major limitation. Each photon that is successfully received, carrying one bit of the message, must somehow have been transmitted intact from the transmitter to the receiver. But every method of transmission involves losses, and if these are too heavy the message will never arrive. Setting up relay stations (which is the remedy for this problem in existing communication systems) would compromise the security because an eavesdropper could, without being detected, monitor what goes on inside the relay station. The best existing quantum-cryptographic systems use fibre-optic cables and have a range of about ten kilometres. This would suffice to provide, say, the financial district of a city with absolutely secure internal communications. Marketable systems may not be far away, but to solve the problem of public-key cryptography in general — say, for global communication — further advances in quantum cryptography are required.
Experimental and theoretical research in the field of quantum computation is accelerating world-wide. Ever more promising new technologies for realizing quantum computers are being proposed, and new types of quantum computation with various advantages over classical computation are continually being discovered and analysed. I find all these developments very exciting, and I believe that some of them will bear technological fruit. But as far as this book is concerned, that is a side-issue. From a fundamental standpoint it does not matter how useful quantum computation turns out to be, nor does it matter whether we build the first universal quantum computer next week, or centuries from now, or never. The quantum theory of computation must in any case be an integral part of the world-view of anyone who seeks a fundamental understanding of reality. What quantum computers tell us about connections between the laws of physics, universality, and apparently unrelated strands of explanation of the fabric of reality, we can discover — and are already discovering — by studying them theoretically.
