# 10 - The Nature of Mathematics

**10**
**The Nature of Mathematics**
The ‘fabric of reality’ that I have been describing so far has been the fabric of *physical* reality. Yet I have also referred freely to entities that are nowhere to be found in the physical world — abstractions such as numbers and infinite sets of computer programs. Nor are the laws of physics themselves physical entities in the sense that rocks and planets are. As I have said, Galileo’s ‘Book of Nature’ is only a metaphor. And then there are the fictions of virtual reality, the non-existent environments whose laws differ from the real laws of physics. Beyond those are what I have called the ‘Cantgotu’ environments, which cannot even be rendered in virtual reality. I have said that there exist infinitely many of those for every environment that can be rendered. But what does it mean to say that such environments ‘exist’? If they do not exist in reality, or even in virtual reality, where do they exist?
*Do* abstract, non-physical entities exist? Are they part of the fabric of reality? I am not interested here in issues of mere word usage. It is obvious that numbers, the laws of physics, and so on do ‘exist’ in some senses and not in others. The substantive question is this: how are we to understand such entities? Which of them are merely convenient forms of words, referring ultimately only to ordinary, physical reality? Which are merely ephemeral features of our culture? Which are arbitrary, like the rules of a trivial game that we need only look up? And which, if any, can be explained only in a way that attributes an independent existence to them? Things of this last type *must* be part of the fabric of reality as  defined in this book, because one would have to understand them in order to understand everything that is understood.
This suggests that we ought to apply Dr Johnson’s criterion again. If we want to know whether a given abstraction really exists, we should ask whether it ‘kicks back’ in a complex, autonomous way. For example, mathematicians characterize the ‘natural numbers’ 1, 2, 3, . . . in the first instance through a precise definition such as:1 is a natural number.
 
Each natural number has precisely one successor, which is also a natural number.
 
1 is not the successor of any natural number.
Two natural numbers with the same successor are the same.

Such definitions are attempts to express abstractly the intuitive *physical* notion of successive amounts of a discrete quantity. (More precisely, as I explained in the previous chapter, that notion is really quantum-mechanical.) The operations of arithmetic, such as multiplication and addition, and further concepts such as that of a prime number, are then defined with reference to the ‘natural numbers’. But having created abstract ‘natural numbers’ through that definition, and having understood them through that intuition, we find that there is a lot more that we still do not understand about them. The definition of a prime number fixes once and for all which numbers are primes and which are not. But the *understanding* of which numbers are prime — for instance, how prime numbers are distributed on very large scales, how clumped they are, how ‘random’ they are, and why — involves a wealth of new insights and new explanations. Indeed, it turns out that number theory is a whole world (the term is often used) in itself. To understand numbers more fully we have to define many new classes of abstract entities, and postulate many new structures and connections among those structures. We find that some of these abstract structures are related to other intuitions that we already had but  which, on the face of it, had nothing to do with numbers — such as *symmetry, rotation,* the *continuum, sets, infinity*, and many more. Thus, abstract mathematical entities we think we are familiar with can nevertheless surprise or disappoint us. They can pop up unexpectedly in new guises, or disguises. They can be inexplicable, and then later conform to a new explanation. So they are complex and autonomous, and therefore by Dr Johnson’s criterion we must conclude that they are real. Since we cannot understand them either as being part of ourselves or as being part of something else that we already understand, but we *can* understand them as independent entities, we must conclude that they *are* real, independent entities.
Nevertheless, abstract entities are intangible. They do not kick back physically in the sense that a stone does, so experiment and observation cannot play quite the same role in mathematics as they do in science. In mathematics, *proof* plays that role. Dr Johnson’s stone kicked back by making his foot rebound. Prime numbers kick back when we prove something unexpected about them — especially if we can go on to explain it too. In the traditional view, the crucial difference between proof and experiment is that a proof makes no reference to the physical world. We can perform a proof in the privacy of our own minds, or we can perform a proof trapped inside a virtual-reality generator rendering the wrong physics. Provided only that we follow the rules of mathematical inference, we should come up with the same answer as anyone else. And again, the prevailing view is that, apart from the possibility of making blunders, when we have proved something we know with *absolute certainty* that it is true.
Mathematicians are rather proud of this absolute certainty, and scientists tend to be a little envious of it. For in science there is no way of being certain of any proposition. However well one’s theories explain existing observations, at any moment someone may make a new, inexplicable observation that casts doubt on the whole of the current explanatory structure. Worse, someone may reach a better understanding that explains not only all existing observations but also why the previous explanations seemed to work but are nevertheless quite wrong. Galileo, for instance, found  a new explanation of the age-old observation that the ground beneath our feet is at rest, an explanation that involved the ground actually moving. Virtual reality — which can make one environment seem to be another — underlines the fact that when observation is the ultimate arbiter between theories, there can never be any certainty that an existing explanation, however obvious, is even remotely true. But when proof is the arbiter, it is supposed, there can be certainty.
It is said that the rules of logic were first formulated in the hope that they would provide an impartial and infallible method of resolving all disputes. This hope can never be fulfilled. The study of logic itself revealed that the scope of logical deduction as a means of discovering the truth is severely limited. Given substantive assumptions about the world, one can deduce conclusions; but the conclusions are no more secure than the assumptions. The only propositions that logic can prove without recourse to assumptions are tautologies — statements such as ‘all planets are planets’, which assert nothing. In particular, all substantive questions of science lie outside the domain in which logic alone can settle disputes. But mathematics, it is supposed, lies *inside* that domain. Thus mathematicians seek absolute but abstract truth, while scientists console themselves with the thought that they can gain substantive and useful knowledge of the physical world. But they must accept that this knowledge comes without guarantees. It is forever tentative, forever fallible. The idea that science is characterized by ‘induction’, a method of justification which is supposed to be a slightly fallible analogue of logical deduction, is an attempt to make the best of this perceived second-class status of scientific knowledge. Instead of deductively justified certainties, perhaps we can make do with inductively justified near-certainties.
As I have said, there is no such method of justification as ‘induction’. The idea of reasoning one’s way to ‘near-certainty’ in science is myth. How could I prove with ‘near-certainty’ that a wonderful new theory of physics, overturning my most unquestioned assumptions about reality, will not be published tomorrow? Or that I am not inside a virtual-reality generator? But all this is not to say  that scientific knowledge is indeed ‘second-class’. For the idea that mathematics yields certainties *is a myth too*.
Since ancient times, the idea that mathematical knowledge has a privileged status has often been associated with the idea that some abstract entities, at least, are not merely part of the fabric of reality but are even more real than the physical world. Pythagoras believed that regularities in nature are the expression of mathematical relationships between natural numbers. ‘All things are numbers’ was the slogan. This was not meant quite literally, but Plato went further and effectively denied that the physical world is real at all. He regarded our apparent experiences of it as worthless or misleading, and argued that the physical objects and phenomena we perceive are merely ‘shadows’ or imperfect imitations of their ideal essences (‘Forms’, or ‘Ideas’) which exist in a separate realm that is the true reality. In that realm there exist, among other things, the Forms of pure numbers such as 1, 2, 3, . . . , and the Forms of mathematical operations such as addition and multiplication. We may perceive some shadows of these Forms, as when we place an apple on the table, and then another apple, and then see that there are two apples. But the apples exhibit ‘one-ness’ and ‘two-ness’ (and, for that matter, ‘apple-ness’) only imperfectly. They are not perfectly identical, so there are never really *two* of anything on the table. It might be objected that the number two could also be represented by there being two *different* things on the table. But such a representation is still imperfect because we must then admit that there are cells that have fallen from the apples, and dust, and air, on the table as well. Unlike Pythagoras, Plato had no particular axe to grind about the natural numbers. His reality contained the Forms of all concepts. For example, it contained the Form of a perfect circle. The ‘circles’ we experience are never really circles. They are not perfectly round, nor perfectly planar; they have a finite thickness; and so on. All of them are imperfect.
Plato then pointed out a problem. Given all this Earthly imperfection (and, he could have added, given our imperfect sensory access even to Earthly circles), how can we possibly know what we know about real, perfect circles? Evidently we do know about them, but  how? Where did Euclid obtain the knowledge of geometry which he expressed in his famous axioms, when no genuine circles, points or straight lines were available to him? Where does the certainty of a mathematical proof come from, if no one can perceive the abstract entities that the proof refers to? Plato’s answer was that we do not obtain our knowledge of such things from this world of shadow and illusion. Instead, we obtain it directly from the real world of Forms itself. We have perfect inborn knowledge of that world which is, he suggests, forgotten at birth, and then obscured by layers of errors caused by trusting our senses. But reality can be remembered through the diligent application of ‘reason’, which then yields the absolute certainty that experience can never provide.
I wonder whether anyone has ever believed this rather rickety fantasy (including Plato himself, who was after all a very competent philosopher who believed in telling ennobling lies to the public). However, the problem he posed — of how we can possibly have knowledge, let alone certainty, of abstract entities — is real enough, and some elements of his proposed solution have been part of the prevailing theory of knowledge ever since. In particular, the core idea that mathematical knowledge and scientific knowledge come from *different sources*, and that the ‘special’ source of mathematics confers *absolute certainty* upon it, is to this day accepted uncritically by virtually all mathematicians. Nowadays they call this source *mathematical intuition*, but it plays exactly the same role as Plato’s ‘memories’ of the realm of Forms.
There have been many bitter controversies about precisely which types of perfectly reliable knowledge our mathematical intuition can be expected to reveal. In other words, mathematicians agree that mathematical intuition is a source of absolute certainty, but they cannot agree about what mathematical intuition tells them! Obviously this is a recipe for infinite, unresolvable controversy.
Inevitably, most such controversies have centred on the validity or otherwise of various methods of proof. One controversy concerned so-called ‘imaginary’ numbers. Imaginary numbers are the square roots of negative numbers. New theorems about ordinary, ‘real’ numbers were proved by appealing, at intermediate stages of  a proof, to the properties of imaginary numbers. For example, the first theorems about the distribution of prime numbers were proved in this way. But some mathematicians objected to imaginary numbers on the grounds that they were not real. (Current terminology still reflects the old controversy, even though we now think that imaginary numbers are just as real as ‘real’ numbers.) I expect that their schoolteachers had told them that they were not *allowed* to take the square root of minus one, and consequently they did not see why anyone else should be allowed to. No doubt they called this uncharitable impulse ‘mathematical intuition’. But other mathematicians had different intuitions. They understood what the imaginary numbers were and how they fitted in with the real numbers. Why, they thought, should one not define new abstract entities to have any properties one likes? Surely the only legitimate grounds for forbidding this would be that the required properties were logically inconsistent. (That is essentially the modern consensus which the mathematician John Horton Conway has robustly referred to as the ‘Mathematicians’ Liberation Movement’.) Admittedly, no one had proved that the system of imaginary numbers *was* self-consistent. But then, no one had *proved* that the ordinary arithmetic of the natural numbers was self-consistent either.
There were similar controversies over the validity of the use of infinite numbers, and of sets containing infinitely many elements, and of the infinitesimal quantities that were used in calculus. David Hilbert, the great German mathematician who provided much of the mathematical infrastructure of both the general theory of relativity and quantum theory, remarked that ‘the literature of mathematics is glutted with inanities and absurdities which have had their source in the infinite’. Some mathematicians, as we shall see, denied the validity of reasoning about infinite entities at all. The runaway success of pure mathematics during the nineteenth century had done little to resolve these controversies. On the contrary, it tended to intensify them and raise new ones. As mathematical reasoning became more sophisticated, it inevitably moved ever further away from everyday intuition, and this had two important, opposing effects. First, mathematicians became more meticulous  about proofs, which were subjected to ever increasing standards of rigour before they were accepted. But second, more powerful *methods* of proof were invented which could not always be validated by existing methods. And that often raised doubts as to whether a particular method of proof, however self-evident, was completely infallible.
So by about 1900 there was a crisis at the foundations of mathematics — namely, that there were no foundations. But what had become of the laws of pure logic? Were they not supposed to resolve all disputes within the realm of mathematics? The embarrassing fact was that the ‘laws of pure logic’ were in effect what the disputes in mathematics were now about. Aristotle had been the first to codify such laws in the fourth century BC, and so founded what is today called *proof theory*. He assumed that a proof must consist of a sequence of statements, starting with some premises and definitions and ending with the desired conclusion. For a sequence of statements to be a valid proof, each statement, apart from the premises at the beginning, had to follow from previous ones according to one of a fixed set of patterns called *syllogisms*. A typical syllogism was
[Image: 023]
In other words, this rule said that if a statement of the form ‘all As have property B’ (as in ‘all men are mortal’) appears in a proof, and another statement of the form ‘the individual X is an A’ (as in ‘Socrates is a man’) also appears, then the statement ‘X has property B’ (‘Socrates is mortal’) may validly appear later in the proof, and in particular it is a valid conclusion. The syllogisms expressed what we would call *rules of inference* — that is, rules defining the steps that are permitted in proofs, such that the truth of the premises is transmitted to the conclusions. By the same token, they are rules that can be applied to determine whether a purported proof is valid or not.
Aristotle had declared that all valid proofs could be expressed  in syllogistic form. But he had not proved this! And the problem for proof theory was that very few modern mathematical proofs were expressed purely as a sequence of syllogisms; nor could many of them be recast in that form, even in principle. Yet most mathematicians could not bring themselves to stick to the letter of the Aristotelian law, since some of the new proofs seemed just as self-evidently valid as Aristotelian reasoning. Mathematics had moved on. New tools such as symbolic logic and set theory allowed mathematicians to relate mathematical structures to one another in new ways. This had created new self-evident truths that were independent of the classical rules of inference, so those classical rules were self-evidently inadequate. But which of the new methods of proof were genuinely infallible? How were the rules of inference to be modified so that they would have the completeness that Aristotle had mistakenly claimed? How could the absolute authority of the old rules ever be regained if mathematicians could not agree on what was self-evident and what was nonsense?
Meanwhile, mathematicians were continuing to construct their abstract castles in the sky. For practical purposes many of these constructs seemed sound enough. Some had become indispensable in science and technology, and most were connected by a beautiful and fruitful explanatory structure. Nevertheless, no one could guarantee that the entire structure, or any substantial part of it, was not founded upon a logical contradiction, which would make it literally nonsense. In 1902 Bertrand Russell proved that a scheme for defining set theory rigorously, which had just been proposed by the German logician Gottlob Frege, was inconsistent. This did not mean that it was necessarily invalid to use sets in proofs. Indeed, very few mathematicians seriously supposed that any of the usual ways of using sets, or arithmetic, or other core areas of mathematics, might be invalid. What was shocking about Russell’s result was that mathematicians had believed their subject to be *par excellence* the means of delivering absolute certainty through the proofs of mathematical theorems. The very possibility of controversy over the validity of different methods of proof undermined the whole purpose (as it was supposed) of the subject.
Many mathematicians therefore felt that it was a matter of urgency to place proof theory, and thereby mathematics itself, on a secure foundation. They wanted to consolidate after their headlong advances: to define once and for all which types of proof were absolutely secure, and which were not. Whatever was outside the secure zone could be dropped, and whatever was inside would be the sole basis of all future mathematics.
To this end, the Dutch mathematician Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer advocated an extreme conservative strategy for proof theory, known as *intuitionism*, which still has adherents to this day. Intuitionists try to construe ‘intuition’ in the narrowest conceivable way, retaining only what they consider to be its unchallengeably self-evident aspects. Then they elevate mathematical intuition, thus defined, to a status higher even than Plato afforded it: they regard it as being prior even to pure logic. Thus they regard logic itself as untrustworthy, except where it is justified by direct mathematical intuition. For instance, intuitionists deny that it is possible to have a direct intuition of any infinite entity. Therefore they deny that any infinite sets, such as the set of all natural numbers, exist at all. The proposition ‘there exist infinitely many natural numbers’ they would consider self-evidently false. And the proposition ‘there exist more Cantgotu environments than physically possible environments’ they would consider completely meaningless.
Historically, intuitionism played a valuable liberating role, just as inductivism did. It dared to question received certainties — some of which were indeed false. But as a positive theory of what is or is not a valid mathematical proof, it is worthless. Indeed, intuitionism is precisely the expression, in mathematics, of solipsism. In both cases there is an over-reaction to the thought that we cannot be *sure* of what we know about the wider world. In both cases the proposed solution is to retreat into an inner world which we can supposedly know directly and therefore (?) can be sure of knowing truly. In both cases the solution involves either denying the existence — or at least renouncing explanation — of what lies outside. And in both cases this renunciation also makes it impossible to explain much of what lies inside the favoured  domain. For instance, if it is indeed false, as intuitionists maintain, that there exist infinitely many natural numbers, then we can infer that there must be only finitely many of them. How many? And then, however many there are, why can we not form an intuition of the next natural number above that one? Intuitionists would explain this problem away by pointing out that the argument I have just given assumes the validity of ordinary logic. In particular, it involves inferring, from the fact that there are not infinitely many natural numbers, that there must be some particular finite number of them. The relevant rule of inference is called the *law of the excluded middle*. It says that, for any proposition X (such as ‘there are infinitely many natural numbers’), there is no third possibility between X being true and its negation (‘there are finitely many natural numbers’) being true. Intuitionists coolly deny the law of the excluded middle.
Since, in most people’s minds, the law of the excluded middle is itself backed by a powerful intuition, its rejection naturally causes non-intuitionists to wonder whether the intuitionists’ intuition is so self-evidently reliable after all. Or, if we consider the law of the excluded middle to stem from a *logical* intuition, it leads us to re-examine the question whether mathematical intuition really supersedes logic. At any rate, can it be *self-evident* that it does?
But all that is only to criticize intuitionism from the outside. It is no disproof; nor can intuitionism ever be disproved. If someone insists that a self-consistent proposition is self-evident to them, just as if they insist that they alone exist, they cannot be proved wrong. However, as with solipsism generally, the truly fatal flaw of intuitionism is revealed not when it is attacked, but when it is taken seriously in its own terms, as an explanation of its own, arbitrarily truncated world. Intuitionists believe in the reality of the finite natural numbers 1, 2, 3, . . . , and even 10,949,769,651,859. But the intuitive argument that because each of these numbers has a successor, they form an infinite sequence, is in the intuitionists’ view no more than a self-delusion or affectation and is literally untenable. But by severing the link between their version of the abstract ‘natural numbers’ and the intuitions that those numbers  were originally intended to formalize, intuitionists have also denied themselves the usual explanatory structure through which natural numbers are understood. This raises a problem for anyone who prefers explanations to unexplained complications. Instead of solving that problem by providing an alternative or deeper explanatory structure for the natural numbers, intuitionism does exactly what the Inquisition did, and what solipsists do: it retreats still further from explanation. It introduces further unexplained complications (in this case the denial of the law of the excluded middle) whose only purpose is to allow intuitionists to behave as if their opponents’ explanation were true, while drawing no conclusions about reality from this.
Just as solipsism starts with the motivation of simplifying a frighteningly diverse and uncertain world, but when taken seriously turns out to be realism *plus* some unnecessary complications, so intuitionism ends up being one of the most counter-intuitive doctrines that has ever been seriously advocated.
David Hilbert proposed a much more commonsensical — but still ultimately doomed — plan to ‘establish once and for all the certitude of mathematical methods’. Hilbert’s plan was based on the idea of consistency. He hoped to lay down, once and for all, a complete set of modern rules of inference for mathematical proofs, with certain properties. They would be finite in number. They would be straightforwardly applicable, so that determining whether any purported proof satisfied them or not would be an uncontroversial exercise. Preferably, the rules would be intuitively self-evident, but that was not an overriding consideration for the pragmatic Hilbert. He would be satisfied if the rules corresponded only moderately well to intuition, provided that he could be sure that they were self-consistent. That is, if the rules designated a given proof as valid, he wanted to be sure that they could never designate any proof with the opposite conclusion as valid. How could he be sure of such a thing? This time, consistency would have to be *proved*, using a method of proof which itself adhered to the same rules of inference. Then Hilbert hoped that Aristotelian completeness and certainty would be restored, and that every true mathematical  statement would in principle be provable under the rules, and that no false statement would be. In 1900, to mark the turn of the century, Hilbert published a list of problems that he hoped mathematicians might be able to solve during the course of the twentieth century. The tenth problem was to find a set of rules of inference with the above properties, and, by their own standards, to prove them consistent.
Hilbert was to be definitively disappointed. Thirty-one years later, Kurt Gödel revolutionized proof theory with a root-and-branch refutation from which the mathematical and philosophical worlds are still reeling: he proved that Hilbert’s tenth problem is insoluble. Gödel proved first that any set of rules of inference that is capable of correctly validating even the proofs of ordinary arithmetic could never validate a proof of its own consistency. Therefore there is no hope of finding the provably consistent set of rules that Hilbert envisaged. Second, Gödel proved that if a set of rules of inference in some (sufficiently rich) branch of mathematics is consistent (whether provably so or not), then within that branch of mathematics there must exist valid methods of proof that those rules fail to designate as valid. This is called *Gödel’s incompleteness theorem*. To prove his theorems, Gödel used a remarkable extension of the Cantor ‘diagonal argument’ that I mentioned in Chapter 6. He began by considering any consistent set of rules of inference. Then he showed how to construct a proposition which could neither be proved nor disproved under those rules. Then he proved that that proposition would be true.
If Hilbert’s programme had worked, it would have been bad news for the conception of reality that I am promoting in this book, for it would have removed the necessity for *understanding* in judging mathematical ideas. Anyone — or any mindless machine - that could learn Hilbert’s hoped-for rules of inference by heart would be as good a judge of mathematical propositions as the ablest mathematician, yet without needing the mathematician’s insight or understanding, or even having the remotest clue as to what the propositions were about. In principle, it would be possible to make new mathematical discoveries without knowing any mathematics  at all, beyond Hilbert’s rules. One would simply check through all possible strings of letters and mathematical symbols in alphabetical order, until one of them passed the test for being a proof or disproof of some famous unsolved conjecture. In principle, one could settle any mathematical controversy without ever understanding it — without even knowing the meanings of the symbols, let alone understanding how the proof worked, or what it proved, or what the method of proof was, or why it was reliable.
It may seem that the achievement of a unified standard of proof in mathematics could at least have helped us in the overall drive towards unification — that is, the ‘deepening’ of our knowledge that I referred to in Chapter 1. But the opposite is the case. Like the predictive ‘theory of everything’ in physics, Hilbert’s rules would have told us almost nothing about the fabric of reality. They would, as far as mathematics goes, have realized the ultimate reductionist vision, predicting everything (in principle) but explaining nothing. Moreover, if mathematics had been reductionist then all the undesirable features which I argued in Chapter 1 are absent from the structure of human knowledge would have been present in mathematics: mathematical ideas would have formed a hierarchy, with Hilbert’s rules at its root. Mathematical truths whose verification from the rules was very complex would have been objectively less fundamental than those that could be verified immediately from the rules. Since there could have been only a finite supply of such fundamental truths, as time went on mathematics would have had to concern itself with ever less fundamental problems. Mathematics might well have come to an end, under this dismal hypothesis. If it did not, it would inevitably have fragmented into ever more arcane specialities, as the complexity of the ‘emergent’ issues that mathematicians would have been forced to study increased, and as the connections between those issues and the foundations of the subject became ever more remote.
Thanks to Gödel, we know that there will never be a fixed method of determining whether a mathematical proposition is true, any more than there is a fixed way of determining whether a scientific theory is true. Nor will there ever be a fixed way of generating  new mathematical knowledge. Therefore progress in mathematics will always depend on the exercise of creativity. It will always be possible, and necessary, for mathematicians to invent new types of proof. They will validate them by new arguments and by new modes of explanation depending on their ever improving understanding of the abstract entities involved. Gödel’s own theorems were a case in point: to prove them, he had to invent a new method of proof. I said the method was based on the ‘diagonal argument’, but Gödel extended that argument in a new way. Nothing had ever been proved in this way before; no rules of inference laid down by someone who had never seen Gödel’s method could possibly have been prescient enough to designate it as valid. Yet it is self-evidently valid. Where did this self-evidentness come from? It came from Gödel’s understanding of the nature of proof. Gödel’s proofs are as compelling as any in mathematics, but only if one first understands the explanation that accompanies them.
So explanation does, after all, play the same paramount role in pure mathematics as it does in science. Explaining and understanding the world — the physical world and the world of mathematical abstractions — is in both cases the object of the exercise. Proof and observation are merely means by which we check our explanations.
Roger Penrose has drawn a further, radical and very Platonic lesson from Gödel’s results. Like Plato, Penrose is fascinated by the ability of the human mind to grasp the abstract certainties of mathematics. Unlike Plato, Penrose does not believe in the supernatural, and takes it for granted that the brain is part of, and has access only to, the natural world. So the problem is even more acute for him than it was for Plato: how can the fuzzy, unreliable physical world deliver mathematical certainties to a fuzzy, unreliable part of itself such as a mathematician? In particular, Penrose wonders how we can possibly perceive the infallibility of new, valid *forms* of proof, of which Gödel assures us there is an unlimited supply.
Penrose is still working on a detailed answer, but he does claim that the very existence of this sort of open-ended mathematical intuition is fundamentally incompatible with the existing structure  of physics, and in particular that it is incompatible with the Turing principle. His argument, in summary, runs as follows. If the Turing principle is true, then we can consider the brain (like any other object) to be a computer executing a particular program. The brain’s interactions with the environment constitute the inputs and outputs of the program. Now consider a mathematician in the act of deciding whether some newly proposed type of proof is valid or not. Making such a decision is tantamount to executing a proof-validating computer program within the mathematician’s brain. Such a program embodies a set of Hilbertian rules of inference which, according to Gödel’s theorem, cannot possibly be complete. Moreover, as I have said, Gödel provides a way of constructing, and proving, a true proposition which those rules can never recognize as proven. Therefore the mathematician, whose mind is effectively a computer applying those rules, can never recognize the proposition as proven either. Penrose then proposes to show the proposition, and Gödel’s method of proving it to be true, to that very mathematician. The mathematician understands the proof. It is, after all, self-evidently valid, so the mathematician can presumably see that it is valid. But that would contradict Gödel’s theorem. Therefore there must be a false assumption somewhere in the argument, and Penrose thinks that the false assumption is the Turing principle.
Most computer scientists do not agree with Penrose that the Turing principle is the weakest link in his story. They would say that the mathematician in the story would indeed be unable to recognize the Gödelian proposition as proven. It may seem odd that a mathematician should suddenly become unable to comprehend a self-evident proof. But look at this proposition:
*David Deutsch cannot consistently judge this statement to be true.*
 
I am trying as hard as I can, but I cannot consistently judge it to be true. For if I did, I would be judging that I *cannot* judge it to be true, and would be contradicting myself. But *you* can see that it is true, can’t you? This shows it is at least possible for a proposition to be unfathomable to one person yet self-evidently true to everyone else.
Anyway, Penrose hopes for a new, fundamental theory of physics replacing both quantum theory and the general theory of relativity. It would make new, testable predictions, though it would of course agree with quantum theory and relativity for all existing observations. (There are no known experimental counter-examples to those theories.) However, Penrose’s world is fundamentally very different from what existing physics describes. Its basic fabric of reality is what *we* call the world of mathematical abstractions. In this respect Penrose, whose reality includes all mathematical abstractions, but perhaps not *all* abstractions (like honour and justice), is somewhere between Plato and Pythagoras. What we call the physical world is, to him, fully real (another difference from Plato), but is somehow part of, or emergent from, mathematics itself. Furthermore, there is no universality; in particular, there is no machine that can render all possible human thought processes. Nevertheless, the world (especially, of course, its mathematical substrate) is still comprehensible. Its comprehensibility is ensured not by the universality of computation, but by a phenomenon quite new to physics (though not to Plato): *mathematical entities impinge directly on the human brain*, via physical processes yet to be discovered. In this way the brain, according to Penrose, does not do mathematics solely by reference to what we currently call the physical world. It has direct access to a Platonic reality of mathematical Forms, and can perceive mathematical truths there with (blunders aside) absolute certainty.
It is often suggested that the brain may be a quantum computer, and that its intuitions, consciousness and problem-solving abilities might depend on quantum computations. This *could* be so, but I know of no evidence and no convincing argument that it is so. My bet is that the brain, considered as a computer, is a classical one. But that issue is independent of Penrose’s ideas. He is not arguing that the brain is a new sort of universal computer, differing from the universal quantum computer by having a larger repertoire of computations made possible by new, post-quantum physics. He is arguing for a new physics that will not support computational  universality, so that under his new theory it will not be possible to construe some of the actions of the brain as computations at all.
I must admit that I cannot conceive of such a theory. However, fundamental breakthroughs do tend to be hard to conceive of before they occur. Naturally, it is hard to judge Penrose’s theory before he succeeds in formulating it fully. If a theory with the properties he hopes for does eventually supersede quantum theory or general relativity, or both, whether through experimental testing or by providing a deeper level of explanation, then every reasonable person would want to adopt it. And then we would embark on the adventure of comprehending the new world-view that the theory’s explanatory structures would compel us to adopt. It is likely that this would be a very different world-view from the one I am presenting in this book. However, even if all this came to pass, I am nevertheless at a loss to see how the theory’s original motivation, that of explaining our ability to grasp new mathematical proofs, could possibly be satisfied. The fact would remain that, now and throughout history, great mathematicians have had different, conflicting intuitions about the validity of various methods of proof. So even if it is true that an absolute, physico-mathematical reality feeds its truths directly into our brains to create mathematical intuitions, mathematicians are not always able to distinguish those intuitions from other, mistaken intuitions and ideas. There is, unfortunately, no bell that rings, or light that flashes, when we are comprehending a truly valid proof. We might sometimes feel such a flash, at a ‘eureka’ moment — and nevertheless be mistaken. And even if the theory predicted that there *is* some previously unnoticed physical indicator accompanying true intuitions (this is getting extremely implausible now), we should certainly find it useful, but that would still not amount to a proof that the indicator works. Nothing could prove that an even better physical theory would not one day supersede Penrose’s, and reveal that the supposed indicator was unreliable after all, and some other indicator was better. Thus, even if we make every possible concession to Penrose’s proposal, if we imagine it is true and view the world entirely in its terms, it  still does not help us to explain the alleged certainty of the knowledge that we acquire by doing mathematics.
I have presented only a sketch of the arguments of Penrose and his opponents. The reader will have gathered that essentially I side with the opponents. However, even if it is conceded that Penrose’s Gödelian argument fails to prove what it sets out to prove, and his proposed new physical theory seems unlikely to explain what it sets out to explain, Penrose is nevertheless right that any world-view based on the existing conception of scientific rationality creates a problem for the accepted foundations of mathematics (or, as Penrose would have it, vice versa). This is the ancient problem that Plato raised, a problem which, as Penrose points out, becomes more acute in the light of both Gödel’s theorem and the Turing principle. It is this: in a reality composed of physics and understood by the methods of science, where does mathematical certainty come from? While most mathematicians and computer scientists take the certainty of mathematical intuition for granted, they do not take seriously the problem of reconciling this with a scientific worldview. Penrose does take it seriously, and he proposes a solution. His proposal envisages a comprehensible world, rejects the supernatural, recognizes creativity as being central to mathematics, ascribes objective reality both to the physical world and to abstract entities, and involves an integration of the foundations of mathematics and physics. In all those respects I am on his side.
Since Brouwer’s, and Hilbert’s, and Penrose’s and all other attempts to meet Plato’s challenge do not seem to have succeeded, it is worth looking again at Plato’s apparent demolition of the idea that mathematical truth can be obtained by the methods of science.
First of all, Plato tells us that since we have access only to imperfect circles (say) we cannot thereby obtain any knowledge of perfect circles. But why not, exactly? One might as well say that we cannot discover the laws of planetary motion because we do not have access to real planets but only to images of planets. (The Inquisition *did* say this, and I have explained why they were wrong.) One might as well say that it is impossible to build accurate machine  tools because the first one would have to be built with inaccurate machine tools. With the benefit of hindsight, we can see that this line of criticism depends on a very crude picture of how science works — something like inductivism — which is hardly surprising, since Plato lived before anything that we would recognize as science. If, say, the only way of learning about circles from experience were to examine thousands of physical circles and then, from the accumulated data, to try to infer something about their abstract Euclidean counterparts, Plato would have a point. But if we form a hypothesis that real circles resemble the abstract ones in specified ways, and we happen to be right, then we may well learn something about abstract circles by looking at real ones. In Euclidean geometry one often uses diagrams to specify a geometrical problem or its solution. There is a possibility of error in such a method of description if the imperfections of circles in the diagram give a misleading impression — for example if two circles seem to touch each other when they do not. But if one understands the relationship between real circles and perfect circles, one can, with care, eliminate all such errors. If one does not understand that relationship, it is practically impossible to understand Euclidean geometry at all.
The reliability of the knowledge of a *perfect* circle that one can gain from a *diagram* of a circle depends entirely on the accuracy of the hypothesis that the two resemble each other in the relevant ways. Such a hypothesis, referring to a physical object (the diagram), amounts to a physical theory and can never be known with certainty. But that does not, as Plato would have it, preclude the possibility of learning about perfect circles from experience; it just precludes the possibility of certainty. That should not worry anyone who is looking not for certainty but for explanations.
Euclidean geometry can be abstractly formulated entirely without diagrams. But the way in which numerals, letters and mathematical symbols are used in a symbolic proof can generate no more certainty than a diagram can, and for the same reason. The symbols too are physical objects — patterns of ink on paper, say — which denote abstract objects. And again, we are relying entirely upon the  hypothesis that the physical behaviour of the symbols corresponds to the behaviour of the abstractions they denote. Therefore the reliability of what we learn by manipulating those symbols depends entirely on the accuracy of our theories of their physical behaviour, and of the behaviour of our hands, eyes, and so on with which we manipulate and observe the symbols. Trick ink that caused the occasional symbol to change its appearance when we were not looking — perhaps under the remote control of some high-technology practical joker — could soon mislead us about what we know ‘for certain’.
Now let us re-examine another assumption of Plato’s: the assumption that we do not have access to perfection in the physical world. He may be right that we shall not find perfect honour or justice, and he is certainly right that we shall not find the laws of physics or the set of all natural numbers. But we can find a perfect hand in bridge, or the perfect move in a given chess position. That is to say, we can find physical objects or processes that fully possess the properties of the specified abstractions. We can learn chess just as well with a real chess set as we could with a perfect Form of a chess set. The fact that a knight is chipped does not make the checkmate it delivers any less final.
As it happens, a perfect Euclidean circle can be made available to our senses. Plato did not realize this because he did not know about virtual reality. It would not be especially difficult to program the virtual-reality generators I envisaged in Chapter 5 with the rules of Euclidean geometry in such a way that the user could experience an interaction with a perfect circle. Having no thickness, the circle would be invisible unless we also modified the laws of optics, in which case we might give it a glow to let the user know where it is. (Purists might prefer to manage without this embellishment.) We could make the circle rigid and impenetrable, and the user could test its properties using rigid, impenetrable tools and measuring instruments. Virtual-reality callipers would have to come to a perfect knife-edge so that they could measure a zero thickness accurately. The user could be allowed to ‘draw’ further circles or other geometrical figures according to the rules of Euclidean geometry.  The sizes of the tools, and the user’s own size, could be adjustable at will, to allow the predictions of geometrical theorems to be checked on any scale, no matter how fine. In every way, the rendered circle could respond precisely as specified in Euclid’s axioms. So, on the basis of present-day science we must conclude that Plato had it backwards. We *can* perceive perfect circles in physical reality (i.e. virtual reality); but we shall never perceive them in the domain of Forms, for, in so far as such a domain can be said to exist, we have no perceptions of it at all.
Incidentally, Plato’s idea that physical reality consists of imperfect imitations of abstractions seems an unnecessarily asymmetrical stance nowadays. Like Plato, we still study abstractions for their own sake. But in post-Galilean science, and in the theory of virtual reality, we also regard abstractions as means of understanding real or artificial *physical* entities, and in that context we take it for granted that the abstractions are nearly always *approximations* to the true physical situation. So, whereas Plato thought of Earthly circles in the sand as approximations to true, mathematical circles, a modern physicist would regard a mathematical circle as a bad approximation to the real shapes of planetary orbits, atoms and other physical things.
Given that there will always be a possibility that the virtual-reality generator or its user interface will go wrong, can a virtual-reality rendering of a Euclidean circle really be said to achieve perfection, up to the standards of mathematical certainty? It can. No one claims that mathematics itself is free from *that* sort of uncertainty. Mathematicians can miscalculate, mis-remember axioms, introduce misprints into their accounts of their own work, and so on. The claim is that, *apart from blunders*, their conclusions are infallible. Similarly, the virtual-reality generator, when it was working properly according to its design specifications, would render a perfect Euclidean circle perfectly.
A similar objection would be that we can never tell for sure how the virtual-reality generator will behave under the control of a given program, because that depends on the functioning of the machine and ultimately on the laws of physics. Since we cannot know the  laws of physics for sure, we cannot know for sure that the machine is genuinely rendering Euclidean geometry. But again, no one denies that unforeseen physical phenomena — whether they result from unknown laws of physics or merely from brain disease or trick ink — could mislead a mathematician. But if the laws of physics are in relevant respects as we think they are, then the virtual-reality generator can do its job perfectly, even though we cannot be certain that it is doing so. We must be careful here to distinguish between two issues: whether *we can know* that the virtual-reality machine is rendering a perfect circle; and whether it is *in fact* rendering one. We can never know for sure, but that need not detract one iota from the perfection of the circle that the machine actually renders. I shall return to this crucial distinction — between perfect knowledge (certainty) about an entity, and the entity itself being ‘perfect’ — in a moment.
Suppose that we deliberately modify the Euclidean geometry program so that the virtual-reality generator will still render circles quite well, but less than perfectly. Would we be unable to infer *anything* about perfect circles by experiencing this imperfect rendering? That would depend entirely on whether we knew in what respects the program had been altered. If we did know, we could work out with certainty (apart from blunders, etc.) which aspects of the experiences we had within the machine would faithfully represent perfect circles, and which would not. And in that case the knowledge we gained there would be just as reliable as any we gained when we were using the correct program.
When we *imagine* circles we are doing just this sort of virtual-reality rendering within our own brains. The reason why this is not a useless way of thinking about perfect circles is that we are able to form accurate theories about what properties our imagined circles do or do not share with perfect ones.
Using a perfect virtual-reality rendering, we might experience six identical circles touching the edge of another identical circle in a plane without overlapping. This experience, under those circumstances, would amount to a rigorous proof that such a pattern is possible, because the geometrical properties of the rendered shapes  would be absolutely identical with those of the abstract shapes. But this sort of ‘hands-on’ interaction with perfect shapes is not capable of yielding *every* sort of knowledge of Euclidean geometry. Most of the interesting theorems refer not to one geometrical pattern but to infinite classes of patterns. For example, the sum of the angles of any Euclidean triangle is 180°. We can measure particular triangles with perfect accuracy in virtual reality, but even in virtual reality we cannot measure all triangles, and so we cannot verify the theorem.
How do we verify it? We prove it. A proof is traditionally defined as a sequence of statements satisfying self-evident rules of inference, but what does the ‘proving’ *process* amount to physically? To prove a statement about infinitely many triangles at once, we examine certain physical objects — in this case symbols — which have properties in common with whole classes of triangles. For example, when, under appropriate circumstances, we observe the symbols ‘ΔABC ≡ ΔDEF’ (i.e. ‘triangle ABC is congruent to triangle DEF’), we conclude that a whole class of triangles that we have defined in a particular way always have the same shape as corresponding triangles in another class which we have defined differently. The ‘appropriate circumstances’ that give this conclusion the status of proof are, in physical terms, that the symbols appear on a page underneath other symbols (some of which represent axioms of Euclidean geometry) and that the pattern in which the symbols appear conforms to certain rules, namely the rules of inference.
But which rules of inference should we use? This is like asking how we should program the virtual-reality generator to make it render the world of Euclidean geometry. The answer is that we must use rules of inference which, to the best of our understanding, will cause our symbols to behave, in the relevant ways, like the abstract entities they denote. How can we be sure that they will? We cannot. Suppose that some critics object to our rules of inference because they think that our symbols will behave differently from the abstract entities. We cannot appeal to the authority of Aristotle or Plato, nor can we prove that our rules of inference are infallible (quite apart from Gödel’s theorem, this would lead to an infinite  regress, for we should first have to prove that the method of proof that we used was itself valid). Nor can we haughtily tell the critics that there must be something wrong with their intuition, because *our* intuition says that the symbols will mimic the abstract entities perfectly. All we can do is explain. We must explain why we think that, under the circumstances, the symbols will behave in the desired way under our proposed rules. And the critics can explain why they favour a rival theory. A disagreement over two such theories is, in part, a disagreement about the observable behaviour of physical objects. Such disagreements can be addressed by the normal methods of science. Sometimes they can be readily resolved; sometimes not. Another cause of such a disagreement could be a conceptual clash about the nature of the abstract entities themselves. Then again, it is a matter of rival explanations, this time about abstractions rather than physical objects. Either we could come to a common understanding with our critics, or we could agree that we were discussing two different abstract objects, or we could fail to agree. There are no guarantees. Thus, contrary to the traditional belief, it is not the case that disputes within mathematics can always be resolved by purely procedural means.
A conventional symbolic proof seems at first sight to have quite a different character from the ‘hands-on’ virtual-reality sort of proof. But we see now that they are related in the way that computations are to physical experiments. Any physical experiment can be regarded as a computation, and any computation is a physical experiment. In both sorts of proof, physical entities (whether in virtual reality or not) are manipulated according to rules. In both cases the physical entities represent the abstract entities of interest. And in both cases the reliability of the proof depends on the truth of the theory that physical and abstract entities do indeed share the appropriate properties.
We can also see from the above discussion that proof is a physical *process.* In fact, a proof is a type of computation. ‘Proving’ a proposition means performing a computation which, if one has done it correctly, establishes that the proposition is true. When we use the word ‘proof’ to denote an *object*, such as an ink-on-paper  text, we mean that the object can be used as a program for recreating a computation of the appropriate kind.
It follows that neither the theorems of mathematics, nor the process of mathematical proof, nor the experience of mathematical intuition, confers any certainty. Nothing does. Our mathematical knowledge may, just like our scientific knowledge, be deep and broad, it may be subtle and wonderfully explanatory, it may be uncontroversially accepted; but it cannot be certain. No one can guarantee that a proof that was previously thought to be valid will not one day turn out to contain a profound misconception, made to seem natural by a previously unquestioned ‘self-evident’ assumption either about the physical world, or about the abstract world, or about the way in which some physical and abstract entities are related.
It was just such a mistaken, self-evident assumption that caused geometry itself to be mis-classified as a branch of mathematics for over two millennia, from about 300 BC when Euclid wrote his *Elements,* to the nineteenth century (and indeed in most dictionaries and schoolbooks to this day). Euclidean geometry formed part of every mathematician’s intuition. Eventually some mathematicians began to doubt that one in particular of Euclid’s axioms was self-evident (the so-called ‘parallel axiom’). They did not, at first, doubt that this axiom was true. The great German mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss is said to have been the first to put it to the test. The parallel axiom is required in the proof that the angles of a triangle add up to 180°. Legend has it that, in the greatest secrecy (for fear of ridicule), Gauss placed assistants with lanterns and theodolites at the summits of three hills, the vertices of the largest triangle he could conveniently measure. He detected no deviation from Euclid’s predictions, but we now know that that was only because his instruments were not sensitive enough. (The vicinity of the Earth happens to be rather a tame place geometrically.) Einstein’s general theory of relativity included a new theory of geometry that contradicted Euclid’s and has been vindicated by experiment. The angles of a real triangle really do *not* necessarily add up to 180°: the true total depends on the gravitational field within the triangle.
A very similar mis-classification has been caused by the fundamental mistake that mathematicians since antiquity have been making about the very nature of their subject, namely that mathematical knowledge is more certain than any other form of knowledge. Having made that mistake, one has no choice but to classify proof theory as part of mathematics, for a mathematical theorem could not be certain if the theory that justifies its method of proof were itself uncertain. But as we have just seen, proof theory is not a branch of mathematics — it is a science. Proofs are not abstract. There is no such thing as abstractly proving something, just as there is no such thing as abstractly calculating or computing something. One can of course define a class of abstract entities and call them ‘proofs’, but those ‘proofs’ cannot verify mathematical statements because no one can see them. They cannot persuade anyone of the truth of a proposition, any more than an abstract virtual-reality generator that does not physically exist can persuade people that they are in a different environment, or an abstract computer can factorize a number for us. A mathematical ‘theory of proofs’ would have no bearing on which mathematical truths can or cannot be proved in reality, just as a theory of abstract ‘computation’ has no bearing on what mathematicians — or anyone else — can or cannot calculate in reality, unless there is a separate, empirical reason for believing that the abstract ‘computations’ in the theory resemble real computations. Computations, including the special computations that qualify as proofs, are physical processes. Proof theory is about how to ensure that those processes correctly mimic the abstract entities they are intended to mimic.
Gödel’s theorems have been hailed as ‘the first new theorems of pure logic for two thousand years’. But that is not so: Gödel’s theorems are about what can and cannot be proved, and proof is a physical process. Nothing in proof theory is a matter of logic alone. The new way in which Gödel managed to prove general assertions about proofs depends on certain assumptions about which physical processes can or cannot represent an abstract fact in a way that an observer can detect and be convinced by. Gödel distilled such assumptions into his explicit and tacit justification of  his results. His results were self-evidently justified, not because they were ‘pure logic’ but because mathematicians found the assumptions self-evident.
One of Gödel’s assumptions was the traditional one that a proof can have only a finite number of steps. The intuitive justification of this assumption is that we are finite beings and could never grasp a literally infinite number of assertions. This intuition, by the way, caused many mathematicians to worry when, in 1976, Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Haken used a computer to prove the famous ‘four-colour conjecture’ (that using only four different colours, any map drawn in a plane can be coloured so that no two adjacent regions have the same colour). The program required hundreds of hours of computer time, which meant that the steps of the proof, if written down, could not have been read, let alone recognized as self-evident, by a human being in many lifetimes. ‘Should we take the computer’s word for it that the four-colour conjecture is proved?’, the sceptics wondered — though it had never occurred to them to catalogue all the firings of all the neurons in their own brains when they accepted a relatively ‘simple’ proof.
The same worry may seem more justified when applied to a putative proof with an infinite number of steps. But what is a ‘step’, and what is ‘infinite’? In the fifth century BC Zeno of Elea concluded, on the basis of a similar intuition, that Achilles will never overtake the tortoise if the tortoise has a head start. After all, by the time Achilles reaches the point where the tortoise is now, it will have moved on a little. By the time he reaches that point, it will have moved a little further, and so on *ad infinitum.* Thus the ‘catching-up’ procedure requires Achilles to perform an infinite number of catching-up steps, which as a finite being he supposedly cannot do. But what Achilles can do cannot be discovered by pure logic. It depends entirely on what the governing laws of physics say he can do. And if those laws say he will overtake the tortoise, then overtake it he will. According to classical physics, catching up requires an infinite number of steps of the form ‘move to the tortoise’s present location’. In that sense it is a computationally infinite operation. Equivalently, considered as a proof  that one abstract quantity becomes larger than another when a given set of operations is applied, it is a proof with an infinite number of steps. But the relevant laws designate it as a physically finite process — and that is all that counts.
Gödel’s intuition about steps and finiteness does, as far as we know, capture real physical constraints on the process of proof. Quantum theory requires discrete steps, and none of the known ways in which physical objects can interact would allow for an infinite number of steps to precede a measurable conclusion. (It might, however, be possible for an infinite number of steps to be completed in the whole history of the universe — as I shall explain in Chapter 14.) Classical physics would not have conformed to these intuitions if (impossibly) it had been true. For example, the continuous motion of classical systems would have allowed for ‘analogue’ computation which did not proceed in steps and which had a substantially different repertoire from the universal Turing machine. Several examples are known of contrived classical laws under which an infinite amount of computation (infinite, that is, by Turing-machine or quantum-computer standards) could be performed by physically finite methods. Of course, classical physics is incompatible with the results of countless experiments, so it is rather artificial to speculate on what the ‘actual’ classical laws of physics ‘would have been’; but what these examples show is that one cannot *prove,* independently of any knowledge of physics, that a proof must consist of finitely many steps. The same considerations apply to the intuition that there must be finitely many rules of inference, and that these must be ‘straightforwardly applicable’. None of these requirements is meaningful in the abstract: they are physical requirements. Hilbert, in his influential essay ‘On the Infinite’, contemptuously ridiculed the idea that the ‘finite-number-of-steps’ requirement is a substantive one. But the above argument shows that he was mistaken: it is substantive, and it follows only from his and other mathematicians’ *physical* intuition.
At least one of Gödel’s intuitions about proof turns out to have been mistaken; fortunately, it happens not to affect the proofs of  his theorems. He inherited it intact from the prehistory of Greek mathematics, and it remained unquestioned by every generation of mathematicians until it was proved false in the 1980s by discoveries in the quantum theory of computation. It is the intuition that a proof is a particular type of *object,* namely a sequence of statements that obey rules of inference. I have already argued that a proof is better regarded not as an object but as a process, a type of computation. But in the classical theory of proof or computation this makes no fundamental difference, for the following reason. If we can go through the process of a proof, we can, with only a moderate amount of extra effort, keep a record of everything relevant that happens during that process. That record, a physical object, will constitute a proof in the sequence-of-statements sense. And conversely, if we have such a record we can read through it, checking that it satisfies the rules of inference, and in the process of doing so we shall have proved the conclusion. In other words, in the classical case, converting between proof processes and proof objects is always a tractable task.
Now consider some mathematical calculation that is intractable on all classical computers, but suppose that a quantum computer can easily perform it using interference between, say, 10^500 universes. To make the point more clearly, let the calculation be such that the answer (unlike the result of a factorization) cannot be tractably verified once we have it. The process of programming a quantum computer to perform such a computation, running the program and obtaining a result, constitutes a proof that the mathematical calculation has that particular result. But now there is no way of keeping a record of everything that happened during the proof process, because most of it happened in other universes, and measuring the computational state would alter the interference properties and so invalidate the proof. So creating an old-fashioned proof *object* would be infeasible; moreover, there is not remotely enough material in the universe as we know it to make such an object, since there would be vastly more steps in the proof than there are atoms in the known universe. This example shows that because of the possibility of quantum computation, the two notions of proof  are not equivalent. The intuition of a proof as an object does not capture all the ways in which a mathematical statement may in reality be proved.
Once again, we see the inadequacy of the traditional mathematical method of deriving certainty by trying to strip away every possible source of ambiguity or error from our intuitions until only self-evident truth remains. That is what Gödel had done. That is what Church, Post and especially Turing had done when trying to intuit their universal models for computation. Turing hoped that his abstracted-paper-tape model was so simple, so transparent and well defined, that it would not depend on any assumptions about physics that could conceivably be falsified, and therefore that it could become the basis of an abstract theory of computation that was independent of the underlying physics. ‘He thought,’ as Feynman once put it, ‘that he understood paper.’ But he was mistaken. Real, quantum-mechanical paper is wildly different from the abstract stuff that the Turing machine uses. The Turing machine is entirely classical, and does not allow for the possibility that the paper might have different symbols written on it in different universes, and that those might interfere with one another. Of course, it is impractical to detect interference between different states of a paper tape. But the point is that Turing’s intuition, because it included false assumptions from classical physics, caused him to abstract away some of the *computational* properties of his hypothetical machine, the very properties he intended to keep. That is why the resulting model of computation was incomplete.
That mathematicians throughout the ages should have made various mistakes about matters of proof and certainty is only natural. The present discussion should lead us to expect that the current view will not last for ever, either. But the confidence with which mathematicians have blundered into these mistakes and their inability to acknowledge even the possibility of error in these matters are, I think, connected with an ancient and widespread confusion between the *methods* of mathematics and its *subject-matter.* Let me explain. Unlike the relationships between physical entities,  relationships between abstract entities are independent of any contingent facts and of any laws of physics. They are determined absolutely and objectively by the autonomous properties of the abstract entities themselves. Mathematics, the study of these relationships and properties, is therefore the study of *absolutely necessary truths.* In other words, the truths that mathematics *studies* are absolutely certain. But that does not mean that our knowledge of those necessary truths is itself certain, nor does it mean that the methods of mathematics confer necessary truth on their conclusions. After all, mathematics also studies falsehoods and paradoxes. And that does not mean that the conclusions of such a study are necessarily false or paradoxical.
Necessary truth is merely the *subject-matter* of mathematics, not the reward we get for doing mathematics. The objective of mathematics is not, and cannot be, mathematical certainty. It is not even mathematical truth, certain or otherwise. It is, and must be, mathematical explanation.
Why, then, does mathematics work as well as it does? Why does it lead to conclusions which, though not certain, can be accepted and applied unproblematically for millennia at least? Ultimately the reason is that *some* of our knowledge of the physical world is also that reliable and uncontroversial. And when we understand the physical world sufficiently well, we also understand which physical objects have properties in common with which abstract ones. But in principle the reliability of our knowledge of mathematics remains subsidiary to our knowledge of physical reality. Every mathematical proof depends absolutely for its validity on our being right about the rules that govern the behaviour of some physical objects, be they virtual-reality generators, ink and paper, or our own brains.
So mathematical intuition is a species of physical intuition. Physical intuition is a set of rules of thumb, some perhaps inborn, many built up in childhood, about how the physical world behaves. For example, we have intuitions that there are such things as physical objects, and that they have definite attributes such as shape, colour, weight and position in space, some of which exist even when the objects are unobserved. Another is that there is a physical  variable — time — with respect to which attributes change, but that nevertheless objects can retain their identity over time. Another is that objects interact, and that this can change some of their attributes. Mathematical intuition concerns the way in which the physical world can display the properties of abstract entities. One such intuition is that of an abstract law, or at least an explanation, that underlies the behaviour of objects. The intuition that space admits closed surfaces that separate an ‘inside’ from an ‘outside’ may be refined into the mathematical intuition of a *set,* which partitions everything into members and non-members of the set. But further refinement by mathematicians (starting with Russell’s refutation of Frege’s set theory) has shown that this intuition ceases to be accurate when the sets in question contain ‘too many’ members (too large a degree of infinity of members).
Even if any physical or mathematical intuition were inborn, that would not confer any special authority upon it. Inborn intuition cannot be taken as a surrogate for Plato’s ‘memories’ of the world of Forms. For it is a commonplace observation that many of the intuitions built into human beings by accidents of evolution are simply false. For example, the human eye and its controlling software implicitly embody the false theory that yellow light consists of a mixture of red and green light (in the sense that yellow light gives us exactly the same sensation as a mixture of red light and green light does). In reality, all three types of light have different frequencies and cannot be created by mixing light of other frequencies. The fact that a mixture of red and green light appears to us to be yellow light has nothing whatever to do with the properties of light, but is a property of our eyes. It is the result of a design compromise that occurred at some time during our distant ancestors’ evolution. It is just possible (though I do not believe it) that Euclidean geometry or Aristotelian logic are somehow built into the structure of our brains, as the philosopher Immanuel Kant believed. But that would not logically imply that they were true. Even in the still more implausible event that we have inborn intuitions that we are constitutionally unable to shake off, such intuitions would still not be necessary truths.
The fabric of reality, then, does have a more unified structure than would have been possible if mathematical knowledge had been verifiable with certainty, and hence hierarchical, as has traditionally been assumed. Mathematical entities are part of the fabric of reality because they are complex and autonomous. The sort of reality they form is in some ways like the realm of abstractions envisaged by Plato or Penrose: although they are by definition intangible, they exist objectively and have properties that are independent of the laws of physics. However, it is physics that allows us to gain knowledge of this realm. And it imposes stringent constraints. Whereas everything in physical reality is comprehensible, the comprehensible mathematical truths are precisely the infinitesimal minority which happen to correspond exactly to some physical truth — like the fact that if certain symbols made of ink on paper are manipulated in certain ways, certain other symbols appear. That is, they are the truths that can be rendered in virtual reality. We have no choice but to assume that the incomprehensible mathematical entities are real too, because they appear inextricably in our explanations of the comprehensible ones.
There are physical objects — such as fingers, computers and brains - whose behaviour can model that of certain abstract objects. In this way the fabric of physical reality provides us with a window on the world of abstractions. It is a very narrow window and gives us only a limited range of perspectives. Some of the structures that we see out there, such as the natural numbers or the rules of inference of classical logic, seem to be important or ‘fundamental’ to the abstract world, in the same way as deep laws of nature are fundamental to the physical world. But that could be a misleading appearance. For what we are really seeing is only that some abstract structures are fundamental *to our understanding* of abstractions. We have no reason to suppose that those structures are objectively significant in the abstract world. It is merely that some abstract entities are nearer and more easily visible from our window than others.
