# 11 - Time: The First Quantum Concept

**11**
**Time: The First Quantum Concept**
*Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,*
 *So do our minutes hasten to their end;*
 *Each changing place with that which goes before,*
 *In sequent toil all forwards do contend.*
William Shakespeare (Sonnet 60)
 
Even though it is one of the most familiar attributes of the physical world, time has a reputation for being deeply mysterious. Mystery is part of the very concept of time that we grow up with. St Augustine, for example, said:
What then is time? If no one asks me, I know; if I wish to explain it to one who asks, I know not. (*Confessions*)
 
Few people think that distance is mysterious, but everyone knows that time is. And all the mysteries of time stem from its basic, common-sense attribute, namely that the present moment, which we call ‘now’, is not fixed but moves continuously in the future direction. This motion is called the *flow* of time.
We shall see that there is no such thing as the flow of time. Yet the idea of it is pure common sense. We take it so much for granted that it is assumed in the very structure of our language. In A *Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language,* Randolph Quirk and his co-authors explain the common-sense concept of time with the aid of the diagram shown in Figure 11.1. Each point on the line represents a particular, fixed moment. The triangle ‘∇’ indicates where the ‘continuously moving point, the present  moment’, is located on the line. It is supposed to be moving from left to right. Some people, like Shakespeare in the sonnet quoted above, think of particular events as being ‘fixed’, and the line itself as moving past them (from right to left in Figure 11.1), so that moments from the future sweep past the present moment to become past moments.
What do we mean by ‘time can be thought of as a line?’ We mean that just as a line can be thought of as a sequence of points at different positions, so any moving or changing object can be thought of as a sequence of motionless ‘snapshot’ versions of itself, one at each moment. To say that each point on the line represents a particular moment is to say that we can imagine all the snapshots stacked together along the line, as in Figure 11.2. Some of them show the rotating arrow as it was in the past, some show it as it will be in the future, and one of them — the one to which the moving ⊽ is currently pointing — shows the arrow as it is now, though a moment later that particular version of the arrow will be in the past because the V will have moved on. The instantaneous versions of an object collectively are the moving object in much the way that a sequence of still pictures projected onto a screen collectively *are* a moving picture. None of them, individually, ever changes. Change consists of their being designated (‘illuminated’) in sequence by the moving V (the ‘movie projector’) so that, one by one, they take it in turn to be in the present.
Grammarians nowadays try not to make value-judgements about how language is used; they try only to record, analyse and understand it. Therefore Quirk *et al*. are in no way to blame for the quality of the theory of time that they describe. They do not claim that it is a good theory. They claim only, and I think quite correctly, that it is *our* theory. Unfortunately it is not a good theory. To put it bluntly, the reason why the common-sense theory of time is inherently mysterious is that it is inherently nonsensical. It is not just that it is factually inaccurate. We shall see that, even in its own terms, it does not make sense.
[Image: 024]
**FIGURE 11.1** *The common-sense concept of time that is assumed in the English language (based on Quirk* et al., A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language, *p. 175)*.
 
This is perhaps surprising. We have become used to modifying our common sense to conform to scientific discoveries. Common sense frequently turns out to be false, even badly false. But it is unusual for common sense to be *nonsense* in a matter of everyday experience. Yet that is what has happened here.
Consider Figure 11.2 again. It illustrates the motion of two entities. One of them is a rotating arrow, shown as a sequence of snapshots. The other is the moving ‘present moment’, sweeping through the picture from left to right. But the motion of the present moment is not shown in the picture as a sequence of snapshots. Instead, one particular moment is singled out by the ⊽, highlighted in darker lines and uniquely labelled ‘(now)’. Thus, even though ‘now’ is said by the caption to be moving across the picture, only one snapshot of it, at one particular moment, is shown.
[Image: 025]
**FIGURE 11.2** *A moving object as a sequence of ‘snapshots’, which become the present moment one by one.*
 
Why? After all, the whole point of this picture is to show what happens over an extended period, not just at one moment. If we had wanted the picture to show only one moment, we need not have bothered to show more than one snapshot of the rotating arrow either. The picture is supposed to illustrate the common-sense theory that any moving or changing object is a sequence of snapshots, one for each moment. So if the ∇ is moving, why do we not show a sequence of snapshots of it too? The single snapshot shown must be only one of many that would exist if this were a true description of how time works. In fact, the picture is positively misleading as it stands: it shows the V *not* moving, but rather coming into existence at a particular moment and then immediately ceasing to exist. If that were so, it would make ‘now’ a *fixed* moment. It makes no difference that I have added a label ‘Motion of the present moment’, and a dashed arrow to indicate that the ∇ is moving to the right. What the picture itself shows, and what Quirk *et al.*’s diagram (Figure 11.1) also shows, is the ∇ never reaching any moment other than the highlighted one.
At best, one could say that Figure 11.2 is a hybrid picture which perversely illustrates motion in two different ways. In regard to the moving arrow it illustrates the common-sense theory of time. But it merely *states* that the present moment is moving, while illustrating it as *not* moving. How should we alter the picture so that it will illustrate the common-sense theory of time in regard to the motion of the present moment as well as the motion of the arrow? By including more snapshots of the ‘∇’, one for each moment, each indicating where ‘now’ is at that moment. And where is that? Obviously, at each moment, ‘now’ is that moment. For example, at midnight the ‘∇’ must point to the snapshot of the arrow taken at midnight; at 1.00 a.m. it must point to the 1.00 a.m. snapshot, and so on. Therefore the picture should look like Figure 11.3.
This amended picture illustrates *motion* satisfactorily, but we are now left with a severely pared-down concept of time. The common-sense idea that a moving object is a sequence of instantaneous versions of itself remains, but the other common-sense idea — of the flow of time — has gone. In this picture there is no  ‘continuously moving point, the present moment’, sweeping through the fixed moments one by one. There is no process by which any fixed moment starts out in the future, becomes the present and is then relegated to the past. The multiple instances of the symbols ∇ and ‘(now)’ no longer distinguish one moment from others, and are therefore superfluous. The picture would illustrate the motion of the rotating arrow just as well if they were removed.
So there is no single ‘present moment’, except subjectively. From the point of view of an observer at a particular moment, that moment is indeed singled out, and may uniquely be called ‘now’ by that observer, just as any position in space is singled out as ‘here’ from the point of view of an observer at that position. But objectively, no moment is privileged as being more ‘now’ than the others, just as no position is privileged as being more ‘here’ than other positions. The subjective ‘here’ may move through space, as the observer moves. Does the subjective ‘now’ likewise move through time? Are Figures 11.1 and 11.2 correct after all, in that they illustrate time from the point of view of an observer at a particular moment? Certainly not. Even subjectively, ‘now’ *does* *not move through time.* It is often said that the present *seems* to be moving forwards in time because the present is defined only relative to our consciousness, and our consciousness is sweeping forwards through the moments. But our consciousness does not, and could not, do that. When we say that our consciousness ‘seems’ to pass from one moment to the next we are merely paraphrasing the common-sense theory of the flow of time. But it makes no more sense to think of a single ‘moment of which we are conscious’ moving from one moment to another than it does to think of a single present moment, or anything else, doing so. *Nothing* can move from one moment to another. To exist at all at a particular moment means to exist there for ever. Our consciousness exists at *all* our (waking) moments.
[Image: 026]
**FIGURE 11.3** *At each moment, ‘now’ is that moment.*
 
Admittedly, different snapshots of the observer perceive different moments as ‘now’. But that does not mean that the observer’s consciousness — or any other moving or changing entity — moves through time as the present moment is supposed to. The various snapshots of the observer do not take it in turns to be in the present. They do not take it in turns to be conscious of their present. They are all conscious, and subjectively they are all in the present. Objectively, there is no present.
We do not experience time flowing, or passing. What we experience are differences between our present perceptions and our present memories of past perceptions. We interpret those differences, correctly, as evidence that the universe changes with time. We also interpret them, incorrectly, as evidence that our consciousness, or the present, or something, moves through time.
If the moving present capriciously stopped moving for a day or two, and then started to move again at ten times its previous speed, what would we be conscious of? Nothing special — or rather, that question makes no sense. There is nothing there that could move, stop or flow, nor could anything be meaningfully called the ‘speed’ of time. Everything that exists in time is supposed to take the form of unchanging snapshots arrayed along the time-line. That includes the conscious experiences of all observers, including their mistaken intuition that time is ‘flowing’. They may imagine a ‘moving present’ travelling along the line, stopping and starting, or even going backwards or ceasing to exist altogether. But imagining it does not make it happen. Nothing can move along the line. Time cannot flow.
The idea of the flow of time really presupposes the existence of a second sort of time, outside the common-sense sequence-of-moments time. If ‘now’ really moved from one of the moments to another, it would have to be with respect to this *exterior* time. But taking that seriously leads to an infinite regress, for we should then have to imagine the exterior time itself as a succession of moments, with its own ‘present moment’ that was moving with respect to a still more exterior time — and so on. At each stage, the flow of time would not make sense unless we attributed it to the flow of an exterior time, *ad infinitum.* At each stage, we would have a concept that made no sense; and the whole infinite hierarchy would make no sense either.
The origin of this sort of mistake is that we are accustomed to time being a framework exterior to any physical entity we may be considering. We are used to imagining any physical object as potentially changing, and so existing as a sequence of versions of itself at different moments. But the sequence of moments itself, in pictures like Figures 11.1 — 11.3, is an exceptional entity. It does not exist within the framework of time — it is the framework of time. Since there is no time outside it, it is incoherent to imagine it changing or existing in more than one consecutive version. This makes such pictures hard to grasp. The picture itself, like any other physical object, does exist over a period of time and does consist of multiple versions of itself. But what the picture *depicts —* namely, the sequence of versions of something — exists in only one version. No accurate picture of the framework of time can be a moving or changing picture. It must be static. But there is an inherent psychological difficulty in taking this on board. Although the picture is static, we cannot understand it statically. It shows a sequence of moments simultaneously on the page, and in order to relate that to our experience the focus of our attention must move along the sequence. For example, we might look at one snapshot, and take it to represent ‘now’, and a moment later look at a snapshot to the right of it and think of that as representing the new ‘now’. Then we tend to confuse the genuine motion of our focus of  attention across the mere *picture,* with the impossible motion of something through real moments. It is easily done.
But there is more to this problem than the difficulty of *illustrating* the common-sense theory of time. The theory itself contains a substantive and deep equivocation: it cannot make up its mind whether the present is, objectively, a single moment or many — and hence, for example, whether Figure 11.1 depicts one moment or many. Common sense wants the present to be a single moment so as to allow the flow of time — to allow the present to sweep through the moments from past to future. But common sense also wants time to be a sequence of moments, with all motion and change consisting of differences between versions of an entity at different moments. And that means that the moments are themselves unchanging. So a particular moment cannot become the present, or cease to be the present, for these would be changes. Therefore the present cannot, objectively, be a single moment.
The reason why we cling to these two incompatible concepts — the moving present and the sequence of unchanging moments — is that we need them both, or rather, that we think we do. We continually invoke both of them in everyday life, albeit never quite in the same breath. When we are *describing* events, saying when things happen, we think in terms of a sequence of unchanging moments; when we are *explaining* events as causes and effects of each other, we think in terms of the moving present.
For example, in saying that Faraday discovered electromagnetic induction ‘in 1831’ we are assigning that event to a certain range of moments. That is, we are specifying on which set of snapshots, in the long sheaf of snapshots of world history, that discovery is to be found. No flow of time is involved when we say *when* something happened, any more than a ‘flow of distance’ is involved if we say *where* it happened. But as soon as we say *why* something happened, we invoke the flow of time. If we say that we owe our electric motors and dynamos in part to Faraday, and that the repercussions of his discovery are being felt to this day, we have in mind a picture of the repercussions beginning in 1831 and sweeping consecutively through all the moments of the rest of the nineteenth century, and  then reaching the twentieth century and causing things like power stations to come into existence there. If we are not careful, we think of the twentieth century as initially ‘not yet affected’ by the momentous event of 1831, and then being ‘changed’ by the repercussions as they sweep past on their way to the twenty-first century and beyond. But usually we are careful, and we avoid that incoherent thought by never using the two parts of the common-sense theory of time simultaneously. Only when we think about time itself do we do that, and then we marvel at the mystery of it all! Perhaps ‘paradox’ is a better word than mystery, for we have here a blatant conflict between two apparently self-evident ideas. They cannot both be true. We shall see that neither is true.
Our theories of physics are, unlike common sense, coherent, and they first achieved this by dropping the idea of the flow of time. Admittedly, physicists *talk* about the flow of time just as everyone else does. For example, in his book *Principia,* in which he set out the principles of Newtonian mechanics and gravitation, Newton wrote:
 
Absolute, true, and mathematical time, of itself, and from its own nature, flows equably without relation to anything external.
 
But Newton wisely makes no attempt to translate his assertion that time flows into mathematical form, or to derive any conclusion from it. None of Newton’s physical theories refers to the flow of time, nor has any subsequent physical theory referred to, or been compatible with, the flow of time.
So why did Newton think it necessary to say that time ‘flows equably’? There is nothing wrong with ‘equably’: one can interpret that as meaning that measurements of time are the same for observers at different positions and in different states of motion. That is a substantive assertion (which, since Einstein, we know to be inaccurate). But it could easily have been stated as I have just stated it, without saying that time flows. I think that Newton was deliberately using the familiar language of time without intending its literal meaning, just as he might have spoken informally of the Sun ‘rising’. He needed to convey to the reader embarking on this  revolutionary work that there was nothing new or sophisticated in the Newtonian concept of time. The *Principia* assigns to many words, such as ‘force’ and ‘mass’, precise technical meanings which are somewhat different from their common-sense ones. But the numbers referred to as ‘times’ are simply the times of common sense, which we find on clocks and calendars, and the concept of time in the *Principia* is the common-sense one.
Only, it does not flow. In Newtonian physics, time and motion appear much as in Figure 11.3. One minor difference is that I have been drawing successive moments separated from one another, but in all pre-quantum physics that is an approximation because time is a continuum. We must imagine infinitely many, infinitely thin snapshots interpolating continuously between the ones I have drawn. If each snapshot represents everything throughout the whole of space that physically exists at a particular moment, then we can think of the snapshots as being glued together at their faces to form a single, unchangeable block containing everything that happens in space and time (Figure 11.4) — that is, the whole of physical reality. An inevitable shortcoming of this sort of diagram is that the snapshots of space at each moment are shown as being two-dimensional, whereas in reality they are three-dimensional. Each one of them is space at a particular moment. Thus we are treating time as a fourth dimension, analogous to the three dimensions of space in classical geometry. Space and time, considered together like this as a four-dimensional entity, are called *spacetime.*
[Image: 027]
**FIGURE 11.4** *Spacetime, considered as successive moments.*
 
In Newtonian physics this four-dimensional geometrical interpretation of time was optional, but under Einstein’s theory of relativity it became an indispensable part of the theory. That is because, according to relativity, observers moving at different velocities do not agree about which events are simultaneous. That is, they do not agree about which events should appear on the same snapshot. So they each perceive spacetime as being sliced up in a different way into ‘moments’. Nevertheless, if they each stacked their snapshots in the manner of Figure 11.4, the spacetimes they constructed would be identical. Therefore, according to relativity, the ‘moments’ shown in Figure 11.4 are not objective features of spacetime: they are only one observer’s way of perceiving simultaneity. Another observer would draw the ‘now’ slices at a different angle. So the objective reality behind Figure 11.4, namely the spacetime and its physical contents, could be shown as in Figure 11.5.
Spacetime is sometimes referred to as the ‘block universe’, because within it the whole of physical reality — past, present and future — is laid out once and for all, frozen in a single four-dimensional block. Relative to spacetime, nothing ever moves. What we call ‘moments’ are certain slices through spacetime, and when the contents of such slices are different from one another, we call it change or motion through space.
[Image: 028]
**FIGURE 11.5** *Spacetime view of a moving object.*
 
As I have said, we think of the flow of time in connection with causes and effects. We think of causes as preceding their effects; we imagine the moving present arriving at causes before it arrives at their effects, and we imagine the effects flowing forwards with the present moment. Philosophically, the most important cause-and-effect processes are our conscious decisions and the consequent actions. The common-sense view is that we have *free will:* that we are sometimes in a position to affect future events (such as the motion of our own bodies) in any one of several possible ways, and to choose which shall occur; whereas, in contrast, we are never in a position to affect the past at all. (I shall discuss free will in Chapter 13.) The past is fixed; the future is open. To many philosophers, the flow of time is the process in which the open future becomes, moment by moment, the fixed past. Others say that the alternative events at each moment in the future are *possibilities,* and the flow of time is the process by which, moment by moment, one of these possibilities becomes *actual* (so that, according to those people, the future does not exist at all until the flow of time hits it and turns it into the past). But if the future really is open (and it is!), then that can have nothing to do with the flow of time, for there is no flow of time. In spacetime physics (which is, effectively, all pre-quantum physics, starting with Newton) the future is not open. It is *there,* with definite, fixed contents, just like the past and present. If a particular moment in spacetime were ‘open’ (in any sense) it would necessarily remain open when it became the present and the past, for moments cannot change.
*Subjectively,* the future of a given observer may be said to be ‘open from that observer’s point of view’ because one cannot measure or observe one’s own future. But openness in that subjective sense does not allow choices. If you have a ticket for last week’s lottery, but have not yet found out whether you have won, the outcome is still open from your point of view, even though objectively it is fixed. But, subjectively or objectively, you cannot change it. No causes which have not already affected it can do so any longer. The common-sense theory of free will says that last week, while you still had a choice whether to buy a ticket or not,  the future was still objectively open, and you really could have chosen any of two or more options. But that is incompatible with spacetime. So according to spacetime physics, the openness of the future is an illusion, and therefore causation and free will can be no more than illusions as well. We need, and cling to, the belief that the future can be affected by present events, and especially by our choices; but perhaps that is just our way of coping with the fact that we do not know the future. In reality, we make no choices. Even as we think we are considering a choice, its outcome is already there, on the appropriate slice of spacetime, unchangeable like everything else in spacetime, and impervious to our deliberations. It seems that those deliberations themselves are unchangeable and already in existence at their allotted moments before we ever know of them.
To be an ‘effect’ of some cause means to be affected by that cause — to be changed by it. Thus when spacetime physics denies the reality of the flow of time, it logically cannot accommodate the common-sense notions of cause and effect either. For in the block universe nothing is changeable: one part of spacetime can no more change another than one part of a fixed *three-*dimensional object can change another.
It so happens that all fundamental theories in the era of spacetime physics had the property that given everything that happens before a given moment, the laws of physics determine what happens at all subsequent moments. The property of snapshots being determined by other snapshots is called *determinism.* In Newtonian physics, for instance, if at any moment one knows the positions and velocities of all the masses in an isolated system, such as the solar system, one can in principle calculate (*predict*) where those masses will be at all times thereafter. One can also in principle calculate (*retrodict*) where those masses were at all previous times.
The laws of physics that determine one snapshot from another are the ‘glue’ that holds the snapshots together as a spacetime. Let us imagine ourselves, magically and impossibly, outside spacetime (and therefore in an external time of our own, independent of that within spacetime). Let us slice spacetime into snapshots of space  at each moment as perceived by a particular observer within spacetime, then shuffle the snapshots and glue them together again in a new order. Could we tell, from the outside, that this is not the real spacetime? Almost certainly. For one thing, in the shuffled spacetime physical processes would not be continuous. Objects would instantaneously cease to exist at one point and reappear at another. Second, and more important, the laws of physics would no longer hold. At least, the real laws of physics would no longer hold. There would exist a different set of laws that took the shuffling into account, explicitly or implicitly, and correctly described the shuffled spacetime.
So to us, the difference between the shuffled spacetime and the real one would be gross. But what about the inhabitants? Could they tell the difference? We are getting dangerously close to nonsense here — the familiar nonsense of the common-sense theory of time. But bear with me and we shall skirt around the nonsense. *Of course* the inhabitants could not tell the difference. If they could, they would. They would, for instance, comment on the existence of discontinuities in their world, and publish scientific papers about them — that is, if they could survive in the shuffled spacetime at all. But from our magical vantage-point we can see that they do survive, and so do their scientific papers. We can read those papers, and see that they still contain only observations of the original spacetime. All records within the spacetime of physical events, including those in the memories and perceptions of conscious observers, are identical to those in the original spacetime. We have only shuffled the snapshots, not changed them internally, so the inhabitants still perceive them in the original order.
Thus in terms of real physics — physics as perceived by the spacetime’s inhabitants — all this slicing up and re-gluing of spacetime is meaningless. Not only the shuffled spacetime, but even the collection of unglued-together snapshots, is physically identical to the original spacetime. We picture all the snapshots glued together in the right order because this represents the relationships between them that are determined by the laws of physics. A picture of them glued together in a different order would represent the  same physical events — the same history — but would somewhat misrepresent the relationships between those events. So the snapshots have an *intrinsic* order, defined by their contents and by the real laws of physics. Any one of the snapshots, together with the laws of physics, not only determines what all the others are, it determines their order, and it determines its own place in the sequence. In other words, each snapshot has a ‘time stamp’ encoded in its physical contents.
That is how it must be if the concept of time is to be freed of the error of invoking an overarching framework of time that is external to physical reality. The time stamp of a snapshot is the reading on some natural clock that exists within that universe. In some snapshots — the ones containing human civilization, for example — there are actual clocks. In others there are physical variables — such as the chemical composition of the Sun, or of all the matter in space — which can be considered as clocks because they take definite, distinct values on different snapshots, at least over a certain region of spacetime. We can standardize and calibrate them to agree with one another where they overlap.
We can reconstitute the spacetime by using the intrinsic order determined by the laws of physics. We start with any of the snapshots. Then we calculate what the immediately preceding and following snapshots should look like, and we locate those snapshots from the remaining collection and glue them on either side of the original snapshot. Repeating the process builds up the whole spacetime. These calculations are too complex to perform in real life, but they are legitimate in a thought experiment in which we imagine ourselves to be detached from the real, physical world. (Also, strictly speaking, in pre-quantum physics there would be a continuous infinity of snapshots, so the process just described would have to be replaced by a limiting process in which the spacetime is assembled in an infinite number of steps; but the principle is the same.)
The predictability of one event from another does not imply that those events are cause and effect. For example, the theory of electrodynamics says that all electrons carry the same charge. Therefore, using that theory we can — and frequently do — predict  the outcome of a measurement on one electron from the outcome of a measurement on another. But neither outcome was caused by the other. In fact, as far as we know, the value of the charge on an electron was not caused by any physical process. Perhaps it is ‘caused’ by the laws of physics themselves (though the laws of physics as we currently know them do not predict the charge on the electron; they merely say that all electrons have the same charge). But in any case, here is an example of events (outcomes of measurements on electrons) that are predictable from one another, but make no causal contribution to one another.
Here is another example. If we observe where one piece of a fully assembled jigsaw puzzle is, and we know the shapes of all the pieces, and that they are interlocked in the proper way, we can predict where all the other pieces are. But that does not mean that the other pieces were *caused* to be where they are by the piece we observed being where it is. Whether such causation is involved depends on how the jigsaw puzzle as a whole got there. If the piece we observed was laid down first, then it was indeed among the causes of the other pieces being where they are. If any other piece was laid down first, then the position of the piece we observed was an *effect* of that, not a cause. But if the puzzle was created by a single stroke of a jigsaw-puzzle-shaped cutter, and has never been disassembled, then none of the positions of the pieces are causes or effects of each other. They were not assembled in any order, but were created simultaneously, in positions such that the rules of the puzzle were already obeyed, which made those positions mutually predictable. Nevertheless, none of them caused the others.
The determinism of physical laws about events in spacetime is like the predictability of a correctly interlocking jigsaw puzzle. The laws of physics determine what happens at one moment from what happens at another, just as the rules of the jigsaw puzzle determine the positions of some pieces from those of others. But, just as with the jigsaw puzzle, whether the events at different moments *cause* one another or not depends on how the moments got there. We cannot tell by looking at a jigsaw puzzle whether it got there by being laid down one piece at a time. But with spacetime we know  that it does not make sense for one moment to be ‘laid down’ after another, for that would be the flow of time. Therefore we know that even though some events can be predicted from others no event in spacetime caused another. Let me stress again that this is all according to pre-quantum physics, in which everything that happens, happens in spacetime. What we are seeing is that spacetime is incompatible with the existence of cause and effect. It is not that people are mistaken when they say that certain physical events are causes and effects of one another, it is just that that intuition is incompatible with the laws of spacetime physics. But that is all right, because spacetime physics is false.
I said in Chapter 8 that two conditions must hold for an entity to be a cause of its own replication: first, that the entity is in fact replicated; and second, that most variants of it, in the same situation, would not be replicated. This definition embodies the idea that a cause is something that makes a difference to its effects, and it also works for causation in general. For X to be a cause of Y, two conditions must hold: first, that X and Y both happen; and second, that Y would not have happened if X had been otherwise. For example, sunlight was a cause of life on Earth because both sunlight and life actually occurred on Earth, and because life would not have evolved in the absence of sunlight.
Thus, reasoning about causes and effects is inevitably also about variants of the causes and effects. One is always saying what *would* have happened if, other things being equal, such and such an event had been different. A historian might make the judgement that *‘if* Faraday had died in 1830, *then* technology would have been delayed for twenty years’. The meaning of this judgement seems perfectly clear and, since in fact Faraday did not die in 1830 but discovered electromagnetic induction in 1831, it seems quite plausible too. It is equivalent to saying that the technological progress which did happen was in part caused by Faraday’s discovery, and therefore also by his survival. But what does it mean, in the context of spacetime physics, to reason about the future of non-existent events? If there is no such event in spacetime as Faraday’s death in 1830, then there is also no such thing as its aftermath. Certainly  we can *imagine* a spacetime that contains such an event; but then, since we are only imagining it, we can also imagine that it contains any aftermath we like. We can imagine, for example, that Faraday’s death was followed by an *acceleration* of technological progress. We might try to get around this ambiguity by imagining only spacetimes in which, though the event in question is different from that in actual spacetime, the laws of physics are the same. It is not clear what justifies restricting our imagination in this way, but in any case, if the laws of physics are the same then the event in question *could not* have been different, because the laws determine it unambiguously from the previous history. So the previous history would have to be imagined as being different as well. How different? The effect of our imagined variation in history depends critically on what we take ‘other things being equal’ to mean. And that is irreducibly ambiguous, for there are infinitely many ways of imagining a state of affairs prior to 1830 which would have led to Faraday’s death in that year. Some of those would undoubtedly have led to faster technological progress, and some to slower. Which of them are we referring to in the *‘if. . . then . . .’* statement? Which counts as ‘other things being equal’? Try as we may, we shall not succeed in resolving this ambiguity within spacetime physics. There is no avoiding the fact that in spacetime exactly one thing happens in reality, and everything else is fantasy.
We are forced to conclude that, in spacetime physics, conditional statements whose premise is false (‘if Faraday had died in 1830 . . .’) have no meaning. Logicians call such statements *counter-factual conditionals,* and their status is a traditional paradox. We all know what such statements mean, yet as soon as we try to state their meaning clearly it seems to evaporate. The source of this paradox is not in logic or linguistics, it is in physics — in the false physics of spacetime. Physical reality is not a spacetime. It is a much bigger and more diverse entity, the *multiverse.* To a first approximation the multiverse is like a very large number of co-existing and slightly interacting spacetimes. If spacetime is like a stack of snapshots, each snapshot being the whole of space at one moment, then the multiverse is like a vast collection of such stacks. Even this (as we  shall see) slightly inaccurate picture of the multiverse can already accommodate causes and effects. For in the multiverse there are almost certainly some universes in which Faraday died in 1830, and it is a matter of fact (not observable fact, but objective fact none the less) whether technological progress in those universes was or was not delayed relative to our own. There is nothing arbitrary about which variants of our universe the counter-factual ‘if Faraday had died in 1830 . . .’ refers to: it refers to *the variants which really* occur somewhere in the multiverse. That is what resolves the ambiguity. Appealing to imaginary universes does not work, because we can imagine any universes we like, in any proportions we like. But in the multiverse, universes are present in definite proportions, so it is meaningful to say that certain types of event are ‘very rare’ or ‘very common’ in the multiverse, and that some events follow others ‘in most cases’. Most logically possible universes are not present at all — for example, there are no universes in which the charge on an electron is different from that in our universe, or in which the laws of quantum physics do not hold. The laws of physics that are implicitly referred to in the counter-factual are the laws that are actually obeyed in other universes, namely the laws of quantum theory. Therefore the *‘if . . . then . . .’* statement can unambiguously be taken to mean ‘in most universes in which Faraday died in 1830, technological progress was delayed relative to our own’. In general we may say that an event X causes an event Y in our universe if both X and Y occur in our universe, but in most variants of our universe in which X does not happen, Y does not happen either.
If the multiverse were literally a collection of spacetimes, the quantum concept of time would be the same as the classical one. As Figure 11.6 shows, time would still be a sequence of moments. The only difference would be that at a particular moment in the multiverse, many universes would exist instead of one. Physical reality at a particular moment would be, in effect, a ‘super-snapshot’ consisting of snapshots of many different versions of the whole of space. The whole of reality for the whole of time would be the stack of all the super-snapshots, just as classically it was a  stack of snapshots of space. Because of quantum interference, each snapshot would no longer be determined entirely by previous snapshots of the same spacetime (though it would approximately, because classical physics is often a good approximation to quantum physics). But the super-snapshots beginning with a particular moment would be entirely and exactly determined by the previous super-snapshots. This complete determinism would not give rise to complete predictability, even in principle, because making a prediction would require a knowledge of what had happened in all the universes, and each copy of us can directly perceive only one universe. Nevertheless, as far as the concept of time is concerned, the picture would be just like a spacetime with a sequence of moments related by deterministic laws, only with more happening at each moment, but most of it hidden from any one copy of any observer.
[Image: 029]
**FIGURE 11.6** *If the multiverse were a collection of interacting spacetimes, time would still be a sequence of moments.*
 
However, that is not quite how the multiverse is. A workable quantum theory of time — which would also be the quantum theory of gravity — has been a tantalizing and unattained goal of theoretical physics for some decades now. But we know enough about it to know that, though the laws of quantum physics are perfectly deterministic at the multiverse level, they do not partition the multiverse in the manner of Figure 11.6, into separate spacetimes, or into super-snapshots each of which entirely determines the others. So we know that the classical concept of time as a sequence of  moments cannot be true, though it does provide a good approximation in many circumstances — that is, in many regions of the multiverse.
To elucidate the quantum concept of time, let us imagine that we have sliced the multiverse into a heap of individual snapshots, just as we did with spacetime. What can we glue them back together with? As before, the laws of physics and the intrinsic, physical properties of the snapshots are the only acceptable glue. If time in the multiverse were a sequence of moments, it would have to be possible to identify all the snapshots of space at a given moment, so as to make them into a super-snapshot. Not surprisingly, it turns out that there is no way of doing that. In the multiverse, snapshots do not have ‘time stamps’. There is no such thing as which snapshot from another universe happens ‘at the same moment’ as a particular snapshot in our universe, for that would again imply that there is an overarching framework of time, outside the multiverse, relative to which events within the multiverse happen. There is no such framework.
Therefore there is no fundamental demarcation between snapshots of other times and snapshots of other universes. This is the distinctive core of the quantum concept of time:Other times are just special cases of other universes.

This understanding first emerged from early research on quantum gravity in the 1960s, in particular from the work of Bryce DeWitt, but to the best of my knowledge it was not stated in a general way until 1983, by Don Page and William Wooters. The snapshots which we call ‘other times in our universe’ are distinguished from ‘other universes’ only from our perspective, and only in that they are especially closely related to ours by the laws of physics. They are therefore the ones of whose existence our own snapshot holds the most evidence. For that reason, we discovered them thousands of years before we discovered the rest of the multiverse, which impinges on us very weakly by comparison, through interference effects. We evolved special language constructs (past and future forms of verbs) for talking about them. We also evolved other  constructs (such as *‘if . . . then . . .’* statements, and conditional and subjunctive forms of verbs) for talking about other types of snapshot, without even knowing that they exist. We have traditionally placed these two types of snapshot — other times, and other universes — in entirely different conceptual categories. Now we see that this distinction is unnecessary.
Let us now proceed with our notional reconstruction of the multiverse. There are far more snapshots in our heap now, but let us again start with an individual snapshot of one universe at one moment. If we now search the heap for other snapshots that are very similar to the original one, we find that this heap is very different from the disassembled spacetime. For one thing, we find many snapshots that are absolutely identical to the original. In fact, any snapshot that is present at all is present in an infinity of copies. So it makes no sense to ask how many snapshots, numerically, have such-and-such a property, but only *what proportion* of the infinite total have that property. For the sake of brevity, when I speak of a certain ‘number’ of universes I shall always mean a certain proportion of the total number in the multiverse.
If, aside from *variants* of me in other universes, there are also multiple identical *copies* of me, which one am I? I am, of course, all of them. Each of them has just asked that question, ‘which one am I?’, and any true way of answering that question must give each of them the same answer. To assume that it is physically meaningful to ask which of the identical copies is me, is to assume that there is some frame of reference outside the multiverse, relative to which the answer could be given — ‘I am the third one from the left . . .’. But what ‘left’ could that be, and what does ‘the third one’ mean? Such terminology makes sense only if we imagine the snapshots of me arrayed at different positions in some external space. But the multiverse does not exist in an external space any more than it exists in an external time: it contains all the space and time there is. It just exists, and physically it is all that exists.
Quantum theory does not in general determine what will happen in a particular snapshot, as spacetime physics does. Instead, it determines what proportion of all snapshots in the multiverse will  have a given property. For this reason, we inhabitants of the multiverse can sometimes make only probabilistic predictions of our own experience, even though what will happen in the multiverse is completely determined. Suppose, for example, that we toss a coin. A typical prediction of quantum theory might be that *if,* in a certain number of snapshots, a coin has been set spinning in a certain manner and clocks show a certain reading, *then* there will also exist half that number of universes in which the clocks show a higher reading and the coin has fallen with ‘heads’ upwards, and another half in which the clocks show the higher reading and the coin has fallen with ‘tails’ upwards.
Figure 11.7 shows the small region of the multiverse in which these events happen. Even in that small region there are a lot of snapshots to illustrate, so we can spare only one point of the diagram for each snapshot. The snapshots we are looking at all contain clocks of some standard type, and the diagram is arranged so that all the snapshots with a particular clock reading appear in a vertical column, and the clock readings increase from left to right. As we scan along any vertical line in the diagram, not all the snapshots we pass through are different. We pass through groups of identical ones, as indicated by the shading. The snapshots in which clocks show the earliest reading are at the left edge of the diagram. We see that in all those snapshots, which are identical, the coin is spinning. At the right edge of the diagram, we see that in half the snapshots in which clocks show the latest reading the coin has fallen with ‘heads’ upwards, and in the other half it has fallen with ‘tails’ upwards. In universes with intermediate clock readings, three types of universe are present, in proportions that vary with the clock reading.
If you were present in the illustrated region of the multiverse, all copies of you would have seen the coin spinning at first. Later, half the copies of you would see ‘heads’ come up, and the other half would see ‘tails’. At some intermediate stage you would have seen the coin in a state in which it is still in motion, but from which it is predictable which face it will show when it eventually settles down. This differentiation of identical copies of an observer  into slightly different versions is responsible for the subjectively probabilistic character of quantum predictions. For if you asked, initially, what result you were destined to see for the coin toss, the answer would be that that is strictly unpredictable, for half the copies of you that are asking that question would see ‘heads’ and the other half would see ‘tails’. There is no such thing as ‘which half’ would see ‘heads’, any more than there is an answer to the question ‘which one am I?’. For practical purposes you could regard this as a probabilistic prediction that the coin has a 50 per cent chance of coming up ‘heads’, and a 50 per cent chance of coming up ‘tails’.
[Image: 030]
**FIGURE 11.7** *A region of the multiverse containing a spinning coin. Each point in the diagram represents one snapshot.*
 
The determinism of quantum theory, just like that of classical physics, works both forwards and backwards in time. From the state of the combined collection of ‘heads’ and ‘tails’ snapshots at the later time in Figure 11.7, the ‘spinning’ state at an earlier time is completely determined, and vice versa. Nevertheless, from the point of view of any observer, information is lost in the coin-tossing process. For whereas the initial, ‘spinning’ state of the coin may be experienced by an observer, the final combined ‘heads’ and ‘tails’ state does not correspond to any possible experience of the observer. Therefore an observer at the earlier time may observe the coin and predict its future state, and the consequent subjective probabilities. But none of the later copies of the observer can  possibly observe the information necessary to retrodict the ‘spinning’ state, for that information is by then distributed across two different types of universe, and that makes retrodiction from the final state of the coin impossible. For example, if all we know is that the coin is showing ‘heads’, the state a few seconds earlier might have been the state I called ‘spinning’, or the coin might have been spinning in the opposite direction, or it might have been showing ‘heads’ all the time. There is no possibility of retrodiction here, even probabilistic retrodiction. The earlier state of the coin is simply not determined by the later state of the ‘heads’ snapshots, but only by the joint state of the ‘heads’ and the ‘tails’ snapshots.
Any horizontal line across Figure 11.7 passes through a sequence of snapshots with increasing clock readings. We might be tempted to think of such a line — such as the one shown in Figure 11.8 — as a spacetime, and of the whole diagram as a stack of spacetimes, one for each such line. We can read off from Figure 11.8 what happens in the ‘spacetime’ defined by the horizontal line. For a period, it contains a spinning coin. Then, for a further period, it contains the coin moving in a way that will predictably result in ‘heads’. But later, in contradiction to that, it contains the coin moving in a way that will predictably result in ‘tails’, and eventually it does show ‘tails’. But this is merely a deficiency of the diagram, as I pointed out in Chapter 9 (see Figure 9.4, p. 212). In this case the laws of quantum mechanics predict that no observer who remembers seeing the coin in the ‘predictably heads’ state can see it in the ‘tails’ state: that is the justification for calling that state ‘predictably heads’ in the first place. Therefore no observer in the multiverse would recognize events as they occur in the ‘spacetime’ defined by the line. All this goes to confirm that we cannot glue the snapshots together in an arbitrary fashion, but only in a way that reflects the relationships between them that are determined by the laws of physics. The snapshots along the line in Figure 11.8 are not sufficiently interrelated to justify their being grouped together in a single universe. Admittedly they appear in order of increasing clock readings which, in *spacetime,* would be ‘time stamps’ which would be sufficient for the spacetime to be reassembled. But in the multiverse there are far too many snapshots for clock readings alone to locate a snapshot relative to the others. To do that, we need to consider the intricate detail of which snapshots determine which others.
[Image: 031]
**FIGURE 11.8** *A sequence of snapshots with increasing clock readings is not necessarily a spacetime.*
 
In spacetime physics, any snapshot is determined by any other. As I have said, in the multiverse that is in general not so. Typically, the state of one group of identical snapshots (such as the ones in which the coin is ‘spinning’) determines the state of an equal number of differing snapshots (such as the ‘heads’ and ‘tails’ ones). Because of the time-reversibility property of the laws of quantum physics, the overall, multi-valued state of the latter *group* also determines the state of the former. However, in some regions of the multiverse, and in some places in space, the snapshots of some physical objects do fall, for a period, into chains, each of whose members determines all the others to a good approximation. Successive snapshots of the solar system would be the standard example. In such regions, classical physical laws are a good approximation to the quantum ones. In those regions and places, the multiverse does indeed look as in Figure 11.6, a collection of spacetimes, and at that level of approximation the quantum concept of time reduces to the classical one. One can distinguish approximately between ‘different times’ and ‘different universes’, and time is approximately a sequence of moments. But that approximation always breaks down if one examines the snapshots in more detail, or looks far forwards or backwards in time, or far afield in the multiverse.
All experimental results currently available to us are compatible with the approximation that time is a sequence of moments. We  do not expect that approximation to break down in any foreseeable terrestrial experiment, but theory tells us that it must break down badly in certain types of physical process. The first is the beginning of the universe, the Big Bang. According to classical physics, time began at a moment when space was infinitely dense and occupied only a single point, and before that there were no moments. According to quantum physics (as best we can tell), the snapshots very near the Big Bang are not in any particular order. The sequential property of time does not begin at the Big Bang, but at some later time. In the nature of things, it does not make sense to ask how much later. But we can say that the earliest moments which are, to a good approximation, sequential occur roughly when classical physics would extrapolate that the Big Bang had happened 10^ — 43 seconds (the *Planck time*) earlier.
A second and similar sort of breakdown of the sequence of time is thought to occur in the interiors of black holes, and at the final recollapse of the universe (the ‘Big Crunch’), if there is one. In both cases matter is compressed to infinite density according to classical physics, just as at the Big Bang, and the resulting gravitational forces tear the fabric of spacetime apart.
By the way, if you have ever wondered what happened before the Big Bang, or what will happen after the Big Crunch, you can stop wondering now. Why is it hard to accept that there are no moments before the Big Bang or after the Big Crunch, so that nothing happens, or exists, there? Because it is hard to imagine time coming to a halt, or starting up. But then, time does not have to come to a halt or start up, for it does not move at all. The multiverse does not ‘come into existence’ or ‘cease to exist’; those terms presuppose the flow of time. It is only imagining the flow of time that makes us wonder what happened ‘before’ or ‘after’ the whole of reality.
Thirdly, it is thought that on a sub-microscopic scale quantum effects again warp and tear the fabric of spacetime, and that closed loops of time — in effect, tiny time machines — exist on that scale. As we shall see in the next chapter, this sort of breakdown of the sequence of time is also physically possible on a large scale, and it  is an open question whether it occurs near such objects as rotating black holes.
Thus, although we cannot yet detect any of these effects, our best theories already tell us that spacetime physics is never an exact description of reality. However good an approximation it is, time in reality must be fundamentally different from the linear sequence which common sense supposes. Nevertheless, everything in the multiverse is determined just as rigidly as in classical spacetime. Remove one snapshot, and the remaining ones determine it exactly. Remove most snapshots, and the few remaining ones may still determine everything that was removed, just as they do in spacetime. The difference is only that, unlike spacetime, the multiverse does not consist of the mutually determining layers I have called super-snapshots, which could serve as ‘moments’ of the multiverse. It is a complex, multi-dimensional jigsaw puzzle.
In this jigsaw-puzzle multiverse, which neither consists of a sequence of moments nor permits a flow of time, the common-sense concept of cause and effect makes perfect sense. The problem that we found with causation in spacetime was that it is a property of *variants* of the causes and effects, as well as of the causes and effects themselves. Since those variants existed only in our imagination, and not in spacetime, we ran up against the physical meaning-lessness of drawing substantive conclusions from the imagined properties of non-existent (‘counter-factual’) physical processes. But in the multiverse variants do exist, in different proportions, and they obey definite, deterministic laws. Given these laws, it is an objective fact which events make a difference to the occurrence of which other events. Suppose that there is a group of snapshots, not necessarily identical, but all sharing the property X. Suppose that, given the existence of this group, the laws of physics determine that there exists another group of snapshots with property Y. One of the conditions for X to be a cause of Y has then been met. The other condition has to do with variants. Consider the variants of the first group that do not have the property X. If, from the existence of these, the existence of some of the Y snapshots is still determined, then X was not a cause of Y: for Y would have happened even  without X. But if, from the group of non-X variants, only the existence of non-Y variants is determined, then X was a cause of Y.
There is nothing in this definition of cause and effect that logically requires causes to precede their effects, and it could be that in very exotic situations, such as very close to the Big Bang or inside black holes, they do not. In everyday experience, however, causes always precede their effects, and this is because — at least in our vicinity in the multiverse — the number of distinct types of snapshot tends to increase rapidly with time, and hardly ever decreases. This property is related to the second law of thermodynamics, which states that ordered energy, such as chemical or gravitational potential energy, may be converted entirely into disordered energy, i.e. heat, but never vice versa. Heat is microscopically random motion. In multiverse terms, this means many microscopically different states of motion in different universes. For example, in successive snapshots of the coin at ordinary magnifications, it seems that the setting-down process converts a group of identical ‘predictably heads’ snapshots into a group of identical ‘heads’ snapshots. But during that process the energy of the coin’s motion is converted into heat, so at magnifications large enough to see individual molecules the latter group of snapshots are not identical at all. They all agree that the coin is in the ‘heads’ position, but they show its molecules, and those of the surrounding air and of the surface on which it lands, in many different configurations. Admittedly, the initial ‘predictably heads’ snapshots are not microscopically identical either, because some heat is present there too, but the production of heat in the process means that these snapshots are very much less diverse than the later ones. So each homogeneous group of ‘predictably heads’ snapshots determines the existence of — and therefore causes — vast numbers of microscopically different ‘heads’ snapshots. But no single ‘heads’ snapshot by itself determines the existence of any ‘predictably heads’ snapshots, and so is not a cause of them.
The conversion, relative to any observer, of possibilities into actualities — of an open future into a fixed past — also makes sense  in this framework. Consider the coin-tossing example again. Before the coin toss, the future is open from the point of view of an observer, in the sense that it is still possible that either outcome, ‘heads’ or ‘tails’, will be observed by that observer. From that observer’s point of view both outcomes are possibilities, even though objectively they are both actualities. After the coin has settled, the copies of the observer have differentiated into two groups. Each observer has observed, and remembers, only one outcome of the coin toss. Thus the outcome, once it is in the past of any observer, has become single-valued and actual for every copy of the observer, even though from the multiverse point of view it is just as two-valued as ever.
Let me sum up the elements of the quantum concept of time. Time is not a sequence of moments, nor does it flow. Yet our intuitions about the properties of time are broadly true. Certain events are indeed causes and effects of one another. Relative to an observer, the future is indeed open and the past fixed, and possibilities do indeed become actualities. The reason why our traditional theories of time are nonsense is that they try to express these true intuitions within the framework of a false classical physics. In quantum physics they make sense, because time was a quantum concept all along. We exist in multiple versions, in universes called ‘moments’. Each version of us is not directly aware of the others, but has evidence of their existence because physical laws link the contents of different universes. It is tempting to suppose that the moment of which we are aware is the only real one, or is at least a little more real than the others. But that is just solipsism. All moments are physically real. The whole of the multiverse is physically real. Nothing else is.
