# 13 - The Four Strands

**13**
**The Four Strands**
A widely held stereotype of the scientific process is that of the idealistic young innovator pitted against the old fogies of the scientific ‘establishment’. The fogies, hidebound by the comfortable orthodoxy of which they have made themselves both defenders and prisoners, are enraged by any challenge to it. They behave irrationally. They refuse to listen to criticism, engage in argument or accept evidence, and they try to suppress the innovator’s ideas.
This stereotype has been elevated into a philosophy by Thomas Kuhn, author of the influential book *The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.* According to Kuhn, the scientific establishment is defined by its members’ belief in the set of prevailing theories, which together form a world-view, or *paradigm.* A paradigm is the psychological and theoretical apparatus through which its holders observe and explain everything in their experience. (Within any reasonably self-contained area of knowledge, such as physics, one may also speak of the ‘paradigm’ within that field.) Should any observation seem to violate the relevant paradigm, its holders are simply blind to the violation. When confronted with evidence of it, they are obliged to regard it as an ‘anomaly’, an experimental error, a fraud — anything at all that will allow them to hold the paradigm inviolate. Thus Kuhn believes that the scientific values of openness to criticism and tentativeness in accepting theories, and the scientific methods of experimental testing and the abandonment of prevailing theories when they are refuted, are largely myths that it would not be humanly possible to enact when dealing with any significant scientific issue.
Kuhn accepts that, for *insignificant* scientific issues, something like a scientific process (as I outlined in Chapter 3) does happen. For he believes that science proceeds in alternating eras: there is ‘normal science’ and there is ‘revolutionary science’. During an era of normal science nearly all scientists believe in the prevailing fundamental theories, and try hard to fit all their observations and subsidiary theories into that paradigm. Their research consists of tying up loose ends, of improving the practical applications of theories, of classifying, reformulating and confirming. Where applicable, they may well use methods that are scientific in the Popperian sense, but they never discover anything fundamental because they never question anything fundamental. Then along come a few young troublemakers who deny some fundamental tenet of the existing paradigm. This is not really scientific criticism, for the troublemakers are not amenable to reason either. It is just that they view the world through a new and different paradigm. How did they come by this paradigm? The pressure of accumulated evidence, and the inelegance of explaining it away under the old paradigm, finally got through to them. (Fair enough, though it is hard to see how one could succumb to pressure in the form of evidence to which one is, by hypothesis, blind.) Anyway, an era of ‘revolutionary’ science begins. The majority, who are still trying to do ‘normal’ science in the old paradigm, fight back by fair means and foul — interfering with publication, excluding the heretics from academic posts, and so on. The heretics manage to find ways of publishing, they ridicule the old fogies and they try to infiltrate influential institutions. The explanatory power of the new paradigm, in its own terms (for in terms of the old paradigm its explanations seem extravagant and unconvincing), attracts recruits from the ranks of uncommitted young scientists. There may also be defectors in both directions. Some of the old fogies die. Eventually one side or the other wins. If the heretics win, they become the new scientific establishment, and they defend their new paradigm just as blindly as the old establishment defended theirs; if they lose, they become a footnote in scientific history. In either case, ‘normal’ science then resumes.
This Kuhnian view of the scientific process seems natural to many people. It appears to explain the repeated, jarring changes that science has been forcing upon modern thought, in terms of everyday human attributes and impulses with which we are all familiar: entrenched prejudices and preconceptions, blindness to any evidence that one is mistaken, the suppression of dissent by vested interests, the desire for a quiet life, and so on. And in opposition there is the rebelliousness of youth, the quest for novelty, the joy of violating taboos and the struggle for power. Another attraction of Kuhn’s ideas is that he cuts scientists down to size. No longer can they claim to be noble seekers after truth who use the rational methods of conjecture, criticism and experimental testing to solve problems and create ever better explanations of the world. Kuhn reveals that they are just rival teams playing endless games for the control of territory.
The idea of a paradigm itself is unexceptionable. We do observe and understand the world through a collection of theories, and that constitutes a paradigm. But Kuhn is mistaken in thinking that holding a paradigm blinds one to the merits of another paradigm, or prevents one from switching paradigms, or indeed prevents one from comprehending two paradigms at the same time. (For a discussion of the broader implications of this error, see Popper’s *The Myth of the Framework*.) Admittedly, there is always a danger that we may underestimate or entirely miss the explanatory power of a new, fundamental theory by evaluating it from within the conceptual framework of the old theory. But it is only a danger, and given enough care and intellectual integrity, we may avoid it.
It is also true that people, scientists included, and especially those in positions of power, do tend to become attached to the prevailing way of doing things, and can be suspicious of new ideas when they are quite comfortable with the old ones. No one could claim that all scientists are uniformly and scrupulously rational in their judgement of ideas. Unjustified loyalty to paradigms is indeed a frequent cause of controversy in science, as it is elsewhere. But considered as a description or analysis of the scientific process, Kuhn’s theory suffers from a fatal flaw. It explains the *succession* from one  paradigm to another in sociological or psychological terms, rather than as having primarily to do with the objective merit of the rival explanations. Yet unless one understands science as a quest for explanations, the fact that it does find successive explanations, each objectively better than the last, is inexplicable.
Hence Kuhn is forced flatly to deny that there has been objective improvement in successive scientific explanations, or that such improvement is possible, even in principle:
there is [a step] which many philosophers of science wish to take and which I refuse. They wish, that is, to compare theories as representations of nature, as statements about ‘what is really out there’. Granted that neither theory of a historical pair is true, they nonetheless seek a sense in which the later is a better approximation to the truth. I believe that nothing of the sort can be found. (in Lakatos and Musgrave (eds), *Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge*, p. 265)
So the growth of objective scientific knowledge cannot be explained in the Kuhnian picture. It is no good trying to pretend that successive explanations are better only in terms of their own paradigm. There are objective differences. We can fly, whereas for most of human history people could only dream of this. The ancients would not have been blind to the efficacy of our flying machines just because, within their paradigm, they could not conceive of how they work. The reason why we can fly is that we understand ‘what is really out there’ well enough to build flying machines. The reason why the ancients could not is that their understanding was objectively inferior to ours.
If one does graft the reality of objective scientific progress onto Kuhn’s theory, it then implies that the entire burden of fundamental innovation is carried by a handful of iconoclastic geniuses. The rest of the scientific community have their uses, but in significant matters they only hinder the growth of knowledge. This romantic view (which is often advanced independently of Kuhnian ideas) does not correspond with reality either. There have indeed been geniuses who have single-handedly revolutionized entire sciences; several have been mentioned in this book — Galileo, Newton,  Faraday, Darwin, Einstein, Gödel, Turing. But on the whole, these people managed to work, publish and gain recognition despite the inevitable opposition of stick-in-the-muds and time-servers. (Galileo was brought down, but not by rival scientists.) And though most of them did encounter irrational opposition, none of their careers followed the iconoclast-versus-scientific-establishment stereotype. Most of them derived benefit and support from their interactions with scientists of the previous paradigm.
I have sometimes found myself on the minority side of fundamental scientific controversies. But I have never come across anything like a Kuhnian situation. Of course, as I have said, the majority of the scientific community is not always quite as open to criticism as it ideally should be. Nevertheless, the extent to which it adheres to ‘proper scientific practice’ in the conduct of scientific research is nothing short of remarkable. You need only attend a research seminar in any fundamental field in the ‘hard’ sciences to see how strongly people’s behaviour as *researchers* differs from human behaviour in general. Here we see a learned professor, acknowledged as the leading expert in the entire field, delivering a seminar. The seminar room is filled with people from every rank in the hierarchy of academic research, from graduate students who were introduced to the field only weeks ago, to other professors whose prestige rivals that of the speaker. The academic hierarchy is an intricate power structure in which people’s careers, influence and reputation are continuously at stake, as much as in any cabinet room or boardroom — or more so. Yet so long as the seminar is in progress it may be quite hard for an observer to distinguish the participants’ ranks. The most junior graduate student asks a question: ‘Does your third equation really follow from the second one? Surely that term you omitted is not negligible.’ The professor is sure that the term is negligible, and that the student is making an error of judgement that someone more experienced would not have made. So what happens next?
In an analogous situation, a powerful chief executive whose business judgement was being contradicted by a brash new recruit might say, ‘Look, I’ve made more of these judgements than you’ve  had hot dinners. If I tell you it works, then it works.’ A senior politician might say in response to criticism from an obscure but ambitious party worker, ‘Whose side are you on, anyway?’ Even our professor, *away from the research context* (while delivering an undergraduate lecture, say) might well reply dismissively, ‘You’d better learn to walk before you can run. Read the textbook, and meanwhile don’t waste your time and ours.’ But in the research seminar any such response to criticism would cause a wave of embarrassment to pass through the seminar room. People would avert their eyes and pretend to be diligently studying their notes. There would be smirks and sidelong glances. Everyone would be shocked by the sheer impropriety of such an attitude. In this situation, appeals to authority (at least, overt ones) are simply not acceptable, even when the most senior person in the entire field is addressing the most junior.
So the professor takes the student’s point seriously, and responds with a concise but adequate argument in defence of the disputed equation. The professor tries hard to show no sign of being irritated by criticism from so lowly a source. *Most* of the questions from the floor will have the form of criticisms which, if valid, would diminish or destroy the value of the professor’s life’s work. But bringing vigorous and diverse criticism to bear on accepted truths is one of the very purposes of the seminar. Everyone takes it for granted that the truth is not obvious, and that the obvious need not be true; that ideas are to be accepted or rejected according to their content and not their origin; that the greatest minds can easily make mistakes; and that the most trivial-seeming objection may be the key to a great new discovery.
So the participants in the seminar, while they are engaged in science, do behave in large measure with scientific rationality. But now the seminar ends. Let us follow the group into the dining-hall. Immediately, normal human social behaviour reasserts itself. The professor is treated with deference, and sits at a table with those of equal rank. A chosen few from the lower ranks are given the privilege of being allowed to sit there too. The conversation turns to the weather, gossip or (especially) academic politics. So long as  those subjects are being discussed, all the dogmatism and prejudice, the pride and loyalty, the threats and flattery of typical human interactions in similar circumstances will reappear. But if the conversation happens to revert to the subject of the seminar, the scientists instantly become scientists again. Explanations are sought, evidence and argument rule, and rank becomes irrelevant to the course of the argument. That is, at any rate, my experience in the fields in which I have worked.
Even though the history of quantum theory provides many examples of scientists clinging irrationally to what could be called ‘paradigms’, it would be hard to find a more spectacular counterexample to Kuhn’s theory of paradigm *succession.* The discovery of quantum theory was undoubtedly a conceptual revolution, perhaps the greatest since Galileo, and there were indeed some ‘old fogies’ who never accepted it. But the major figures in physics, including almost all those who could be considered part of the physics establishment, were immediately ready to drop the classical paradigm. It rapidly became common ground that the new theory required a radical departure from the classical conception of the fabric of reality. The only debate was about what the new conception must be. After a while, a new orthodoxy was established by the physicist Niels Bohr and his ‘Copenhagen school’. This new orthodoxy was never accepted widely enough *as a description of reality* for it to be called a paradigm, though overtly it was endorsed by most physicists (Einstein was a notable exception). Remarkably, it was not centred on the proposition that the new quantum theory was true. On the contrary, it depended crucially on quantum theory, at least in its current form, being false! According to the ‘Copenhagen interpretation’, the equations of quantum theory apply only to unobserved aspects of physical reality. At moments of observation a different type of process takes over, involving a direct interaction between human consciousness and subatomic physics. One particular state of consciousness becomes real, the rest were only possibilities. The Copenhagen interpretation specified this alleged process only in outline; a fuller description was deemed to be a task for the future, or perhaps to be forever beyond human  comprehension. As for the unobserved events that interpolated between conscious observations, one was ‘not permitted to ask’ about them! How physicists, even during what was the heyday of positivism and instrumentalism, could accept such an insubstantial construction as the orthodox version of a fundamental theory is a question for historians. We need not concern ourselves here with the arcane details of the Copenhagen interpretation, because its motivation was essentially to avoid the conclusion that reality is multi-valued, and for that reason alone it is incompatible with any genuine explanation of quantum phenomena.
Some twenty years later, Hugh Everett, then a Princeton graduate student working under the eminent physicist John Archibald Wheeler, first set out the many-universes implications of quantum theory. Wheeler did not accept them. He was (and still is) convinced that Bohr’s vision, though incomplete, was the basis of the correct explanation. But did he therefore behave as the Kuhnian stereotype would lead us to expect? Did he try to suppress his student’s heretical ideas? On the contrary, Wheeler was afraid that Everett’s ideas might not be sufficiently appreciated. So he himself wrote a short paper to accompany the one that Everett published, and they appeared on consecutive pages of the journal *Reviews of Modern Physics.* Wheeler’s paper explained and defended Everett’s so effectively that many readers assumed that they were jointly responsible for the content. Consequently the multiverse theory was mistakenly known as the ‘Everett – Wheeler theory’ for many years afterwards, much to Wheeler’s chagrin.
Wheeler’s exemplary adherence to scientific rationality may be extreme, but it is by no means unique. In this regard I must mention Bryce DeWitt, another eminent physicist who initially opposed Everett. In a historic exchange of letters, DeWitt put forward a series of detailed technical objections to Everett’s theory, each of which Everett rebutted. DeWitt ended his argument on an informal note, pointing out that he just couldn’t feel himself ‘split’ into multiple, distinct copies every time a decision was made. Everett’s reply echoed the dispute between Galileo and the Inquisition. ‘Do you feel the Earth move?’ he asked — the point being that quantum  theory *explains why* one does not feel such splits, just as Galileo’s theory of inertia explains why one does not feel the Earth move. DeWitt conceded.
Nevertheless, Everett’s discovery did not gain broad acceptance. Unfortunately, in the generation between the Copenhagen interpretation and Everett most physicists had given up on the idea of explanation in quantum theory. As I said, it was the heyday of positivism in the philosophy of science. Rejection (or incomprehension) of the Copenhagen interpretation, coupled with what might be called *pragmatic instrumentalism,* became (and remains) the typical physicist’s attitude to the deepest known theory of reality. If instrumentalism is the doctrine that explanations are pointless because a theory is only an ‘instrument’ for making predictions, pragmatic instrumentalism is the practice of using scientific theories without knowing or caring what they mean. In this respect, Kuhnian pessimism about scientific rationality was borne out. But the Kuhnian story of how new paradigms replace old ones was not borne out at all. In a sense, pragmatic instrumentalism itself became a ‘paradigm’ which physicists adopted to replace the classical idea of an objective reality. But this is not the sort of paradigm that one understands the world through! In any case, whatever else physicists were doing they were not viewing the world through the paradigm of classical physics — the epitome, among other things, of objective realism and determinism. Most of them dropped it almost as soon as quantum theory was proposed, even though it had held sway over the whole of science, unchallenged ever since Galileo won the intellectual argument against the Inquisition a third of a millennium earlier.
Pragmatic instrumentalism has been feasible only because, in most branches of physics, quantum theory is not applied in its explanatory capacity. It is used only indirectly, in the testing of other theories, and only its predictions are needed. Thus generations of physicists have found it sufficient to regard interference processes, such as those that take place for a thousand-trillionth of a second when two elementary particles collide, as a ‘black box’: they prepare an input, and they observe an output. They use the  equations of quantum theory to predict the one from the other, but they neither know nor care *how the output comes about* as a result of the input. However, there are two branches of physics where this attitude is impossible because the internal workings of the quantum-mechanical object constitute the entire subject-matter of that branch. Those branches are the quantum theory of computation, and quantum cosmology (the quantum theory of physical reality as a whole). After all, it would be a poor ‘theory of computation’ that never addressed issues of how the output is obtained from the input! And as for quantum cosmology, we can neither prepare an input at the beginning of the multiverse nor measure an output at the end. Its internal workings are all there is. For this reason, quantum theory is used in its full, multiverse form by the overwhelming majority of researchers in these two fields.
So Everett’s story is indeed that of an innovative young researcher challenging a prevailing consensus and being largely ignored until, decades later, his view gradually becomes the new consensus. But the basis of Everett’s innovation was not a claim that the prevailing theory is false, but that it is true! The incumbents, far from being able to think only in terms of their own theory, were refusing to think in its terms, and were using it only instrumentally. Yet they had dropped the previous explanatory paradigm, classical physics, with scarcely a complaint as soon as a better theory was available.
Something of the same strange phenomenon has also occurred in the other three theories that provide the main strands of explanation of the fabric of reality: the theories of computation, evolution and knowledge. In all cases the theory that now prevails, though it has definitely displaced its predecessor and other rivals in the sense that it is being applied routinely in pragmatic ways, has nevertheless failed to become the new ‘paradigm’. That is, it has not been taken on board as a fundamental explanation of reality by those who work in the field.
The Turing principle, for instance, has hardly ever been seriously doubted as a pragmatic truth, at least in its weak forms (for example, that a universal computer could render any physically  possible environment). Roger Penrose’s criticisms are a rare exception, for he understands that contradicting the Turing principle involved contemplating radically new theories in both physics and epistemology, and some interesting new assumptions about biology too. Neither Penrose nor anyone else has yet actually proposed any viable rival to the Turing principle, so it remains the prevailing fundamental theory of computation. Yet the proposition that *artificial intelligence* is possible in principle, which follows by simple logic from this prevailing theory, is by no means taken for granted. (An artificial intelligence is a computer program that possesses properties of the human mind including intelligence, consciousness, free will and emotions, but runs on hardware other than the human brain.) The possibility of artificial intelligence is bitterly contested by eminent philosophers (including, alas, Popper), scientists and mathematicians, and by at least one prominent computer scientist. But few of these opponents seem to understand that they are contradicting the acknowledged fundamental principle of a fundamental discipline. They contemplate no alternative foundations for the discipline, as Penrose does. It is as if they were denying the possibility that we could travel to Mars, without noticing that our best theories of engineering and physics say that we can. Thus they violate a basic tenet of rationality — that good explanations are not to be discarded lightly.
But it is not only the opponents of artificial intelligence who have failed to incorporate the Turing principle into their paradigm. Very few others have done so either. The fact that four decades passed after the principle was proposed before anyone investigated its implications for physics, and a further decade passed before quantum computation was discovered, bears witness to this. People were accepting and using the principle pragmatically within computer science, but it was not integrated with their overall world-view.
Popper’s epistemology has, in every pragmatic sense, become the prevailing theory of the nature and growth of scientific knowledge. When it comes to the rules for experiments in any field to be accepted as ‘scientific evidence’ by theoreticians in that field, or by  respectable journals for publication, or by physicians for choosing between rival medical treatments, the modern watchwords are just as Popper would have them: experimental testing, exposure to criticism, theoretical explanation and the acknowledgement of fallibility in experimental procedures. In popular accounts of science, scientific theories tend to be presented more as bold conjectures than as inferences drawn from accumulated data, and the difference between science and (say) astrology is correctly explained in terms of testability rather than degree of confirmation. In school laboratories, ‘hypothesis formation and testing’ are the order of the day. No longer are pupils expected to ‘learn by experiment’, in the sense that I and my contemporaries were — that is, we were given some equipment and told what to do with it, but we were not told the theory that the results were supposed to conform to. It was hoped that we would induce it.
Despite being the prevailing theory in that sense, Popperian epistemology forms part of the world-view of very few people. The popularity of Kuhn’s theory of the succession of paradigms is one illustration of this. More seriously, very few philosophers agree with Popper’s claim that there is no longer a ‘problem of induction’ because we do not in fact obtain or justify theories from observations, but proceed by explanatory conjectures and refutations instead. It is not that many philosophers are inductivists, or have much disagreement with Popper’s description and prescription of scientific method, or believe that scientific theories are actually unsound because of their conjectural status. It is that they do not accept Popper’s *explanation* of how it all works. Here, again, is an echo of the Everett story. The majority view is that there is a fundamental philosophical problem with the Popperian methodology, even though science (wherever it was successful) has always followed it. Popper’s heretical innovation takes the form of a claim that the methodology has been valid all along.
Darwin’s theory of evolution is also the prevailing theory in its field, in the sense that no one seriously doubts that evolution through natural selection, acting on populations with random variations, is the ‘origin of species’ and of biological adaptation in  general. No serious biologist or philosopher attributes the origin of species to divine creation or to Lamarckian evolution. (Lamarckism, an evolutionary theory that Darwinism superseded, was the analogue of inductivism. It attributed biological adaptations to the inheritance of characteristics that the organism had striven for and acquired during its life.) Yet, just as with the other three strands, objections to pure Darwinism *as an explanation* of the phenomena of the biosphere are numerous and widespread. One class of objections centres on the question whether in the history of the biosphere there has been enough time for such colossal complexity to have evolved by natural selection alone. No viable rival theory has been advanced to substantiate such objections, except conceivably the idea, of which the astronomers Fred Hoyle and Chandra Wickramasinghe are recent proponents, that the complex molecules on which life is based originated in outer space. But the point of such objections is not so much to contradict the Darwinian model as to claim that something fundamental remains unexplained in the matter of how the adaptations we observe in the biosphere came into being.
Darwinism has also been criticized as being circular because it invokes ‘the survival of the fittest’ as an explanation, while the ‘fittest’ are defined retrospectively, by their having survived. Alternatively, in terms of an independent definition of ‘fitness’, the idea that evolution ‘favours the fittest’ seems to be contradicted by the facts. For example, the most intuitive definition of biological fitness would be ‘fitness of a species for survival in a particular niche’, in the sense that a tiger might be thought to be the optimal machine for occupying the ecological niche that tigers occupy. The standard counter-examples to that sort of ‘survival of the fittest’ are adaptations, such as the peacock’s tail, that seem to make the organism much less fit to exploit its niche. Such objections seem to undermine the ability of Darwin’s theory to meet its original purpose, which was to explain how the apparent ‘design’ (i.e. adaptations) in living organisms could have come into being through the operation of ‘blind’ laws of physics on inanimate matter, without the intervention of a purposeful Designer.
Richard Dawkins’ innovation, as set out in his books *The Selfish Gene and The Blind Watchmaker*, is yet again the claim that the prevailing theory is true after all. He argues that none of the current objections to the unadorned Darwinian model turn out, on careful inspection, to have any substance. In other words, Dawkins claims that Darwin’s theory of evolution does provide a full explanation of the origin of biological adaptations. Dawkins elaborated Darwin’s theory in its modern form as the theory of replicators. The replicator that is best at getting itself replicated in a given environment will eventually displace all variants of itself because, by definition, they are worse at getting themselves replicated. It is not the fittest *species* variant that survives (Darwin had not quite realized this) but the fittest *gene* variant. One consequence of this is that sometimes a gene may displace variant genes (such as genes for less cumbersome tails in peacocks) by means (such as sexual selection) that do not especially promote the good of the species or the individual. But all evolution promotes the ‘good’ (i.e. the replication) of the best-replicating genes — hence the term ‘selfish gene’. Dawkins meets each of the objections in detail and shows that Darwin’s theory, correctly interpreted, has none of the alleged flaws and does indeed explain the origin of adaptations.
It is specifically Dawkins’ version of Darwinism that has become the prevailing theory of evolution in the pragmatic sense. Yet it is still by no means the prevailing *paradigm.* Many biologists and philosophers are still haunted by the feeling that there is some fundamental gap in the explanation. For example, in the same sense that Kuhn’s theory of ‘scientific revolutions’ challenges the Popperian picture of science, there is a corresponding evolutionary theory which challenges Dawkins’ picture of evolution. This is the theory of *punctuated equilibrium,* which says that evolution happens in short bursts, with long periods of unselected change in between. This theory may even be factually true. It does not actually contradict the ‘selfish gene’ theory, any more than Popperian epistemology is contradicted by the proposition that conceptual revolutions do not happen every day, or that scientists often resist fundamental innovation. But just as with Kuhn’s theory, the way  in which punctuated equilibrium and other variant evolutionary scenarios have been presented, as solving some allegedly overlooked problem in the prevailing evolutionary theory, reveals the extent to which the explanatory power of Dawkins’ theory has yet to be assimilated.
There has been a very unfortunate consequence, for all four strands, of the prevailing theory’s being generally rejected as an explanation, without serious rival explanations being current. It is that the proponents of the prevailing theories — Popper, Turing, Everett, Dawkins and their supporters — have found themselves constantly on the defensive against obsolete theories. The debate between Popper and most of his critics was (as I said in Chapters 3 and 7) effectively about the problem of induction. Turing spent the last years of his life in effect defending the proposition that human brains do not operate by supernatural means. Everett left scientific research after making no headway, and for several years the theory of the multiverse was championed almost single-handedly by Bryce DeWitt until progress in quantum cosmology in the 1970s forced its pragmatic acceptance in that field. But the opponents of the multiverse theory *as an explanation* have seldom advanced rival explanations. (David Bohm’s theory, which I mentioned in Chapter 4, is an exception.) Instead, as the cosmologist Dennis Sciama once remarked, ‘When it comes to the interpretation of quantum mechanics, the standard of argument suddenly drops to zero.’ Proponents of the multiverse theory typically face a wistful, defiant but incoherent appeal to the Copenhagen interpretation — which, however, hardly anyone still believes. And finally, Dawkins has somehow become the public defender of scientific rationality against, of all things, *creationism,* and more generally against a pre-scientific world-view that has been obsolete since Galileo. The frustrating thing about all this is that, so long as the proponents of our best theories of the fabric of reality have to expend their intellectual energies in futile refutation and re-refutation of theories long known to be false, the state of our deepest knowledge cannot improve. Either Turing or Everett could easily have discovered the quantum theory of computation. Popper could have been  elaborating the theory of scientific explanation. (In fairness I must acknowledge that he did understand and elaborate some connections between his epistemology and the theory of evolution.) Dawkins could, for instance, be advancing his own theory of the evolution of replicating ideas (memes).
The unified theory of the fabric of reality that is the subject of this book is, at the most straightforward level, merely the combination of the four prevailing fundamental theories of their respective fields. In that sense it too is the ‘prevailing theory’ of those four fields taken as a whole. Even some of the connections between the four strands are quite widely acknowledged. My thesis, therefore, also takes the form ‘the prevailing theory is true after all!’ Not only do I advocate taking each of the fundamental theories seriously as an explanation of its own subject-matter, I argue that taken together they provide a new level of explanation of a unified fabric of reality.
I have also argued that none of the four strands can be properly understood independently of the other three. This is possibly a clue to the reason why all these prevailing theories have not been believed. All four individual explanations share an unattractive property which has been variously criticized as ‘idealized and unrealistic’, ‘narrow’ or ‘naïve’ — and also ‘cold’, ‘mechanistic’ and ‘lacking in humanity’. I believe that there is some truth in the gut feeling behind these criticisms. For example, of those who deny the possibility of artificial intelligence, and find themselves in effect denying that the brain is a physical object, a few are really only trying to express a much more reasonable criticism: that the Turing explanation of computation seems to leave no room, even in principle, for any future explanation *in physical terms* of mental attributes such as consciousness and free will. It is then not good enough for artificial-intelligence enthusiasts to respond brusquely that the Turing principle guarantees that a computer can do everything a brain can do. That is of course true, but it is an answer in terms of prediction, and the problem is one of explanation. There is an *explanatory gap.*
I do not believe that this gap can be filled without bringing in  the other three strands. Now, as I have said, my guess is that the brain is a classical computer and not a quantum computer, so I do not expect the explanation of consciousness to be that it is any sort of quantum-computational phenomenon. Nevertheless, I expect the unification of computation and quantum physics, and probably the wider unification of all four strands, to be essential to the fundamental *philosophical* advances from which an understanding of consciousness will one day flow. Lest the reader find this paradoxical, let me draw an analogy with a similar problem from an earlier era, ‘What is life?’ This problem was solved by Darwin. The essence of the solution was the idea that the intricate and apparently purposeful design that is apparent in living organisms is not built into reality *ab initio*, but is an emergent consequence of the operation of the laws of physics. The laws of physics had not specifically mandated the shapes of elephants and peacocks, any more than a Creator had. They make no reference to outcomes, especially emergent ones; they merely determine the rules under which atoms and the like interact. Now, this conception of a law of nature as a set of laws of motion is relatively recent. It can, I think, be credited specifically to Galileo, and to some extent to Newton. The previous concept of a law of nature had been that of a rule stating *what happens*. An example is Johannes Kepler’s laws of planetary motion, which described how the planets move in elliptical orbits. This is to be contrasted with Newton’s laws, which are laws of physics in the modern sense. They make no mention of ellipses, though they reproduce (and correct) Kepler’s predictions under appropriate conditions. No one could have explained what life is under Kepler’s conception of a ‘law of physics’, for they would have been looking for a law that mandates elephants in the same way as Kepler’s laws mandate ellipses. But Darwin was able to wonder how laws of nature that did not mention elephants could nevertheless produce them, just as Newton’s laws produce ellipses. Although Darwin made no use of any specific law of Newton’s, his discovery would have been inconceivable without the world-view underlying those laws. That is the sense in which I expect the solution of the ‘What is consciousness?’ problem to depend on  quantum theory. It will invoke no specific quantum-mechanical processes, but it will depend crucially on the quantum-mechanical, and especially the multi-universe, world-picture.
What is my evidence? I have already presented some of it in Chapter 8, where I discussed the multiverse view of knowledge. Although we do not know what consciousness is, it is clearly intimately related to the growth and representation of knowledge within the brain. It seems unlikely, then, that we shall be able to explain what consciousness is, as a physical process, before we have explained knowledge in physical terms. Such an explanation has been elusive in the classical theory of computation. But, as I explained, in quantum theory there is a good basis for one: knowledge can be understood as complexity that extends across large numbers of universes.
Another mental attribute that is somehow associated with consciousness is free will. Free will is also notoriously difficult to understand in the classical world-picture. The difficulty of reconciling free will with physics is often attributed to determinism, but it is not determinism that is at fault. It is (as I have explained in Chapter II) classical spacetime. In spacetime, *something* happens to me at each particular moment in my future. Even if what will happen is unpredictable, it is already there, on the appropriate cross-section of spacetime. It makes no sense to speak of my ‘changing’ what is on that cross-section. Spacetime does not change, therefore one cannot, within spacetime physics, conceive of causes, effects, the openness of the future or free will.
Thus, replacing deterministic laws of motion by indeterministic (random) ones would do nothing to solve the problem of free will, so long as the laws remained classical. Freedom has nothing to do with randomness. We value our free will as the ability to express, in our actions, who we as individuals are. Who would value being random? What we think of as our *free* actions are not those that are random or undetermined but those that are largely *determined* by who we are, and what we think, and what is at issue. (Although they are largely determined, they may be highly unpredictable in practice for reasons of complexity.)
Consider this typical statement referring to free will: ‘After careful thought I chose to do X; I could have chosen otherwise; it was the right decision; I am good at making such decisions.’ In any classical world-picture this statement is pure gibberish. In the multiverse picture it has a straightforward physical representation, shown in Table 13.1. (I am not proposing to *define* moral or aesthetic values in terms of such representations; I am merely pointing out that, thanks to the multiverse character of quantum reality, free will and related concepts are now compatible with physics.)
Thus Turing’s conception of computation seems less disconnected from human values, and is no obstacle to the understanding of human attributes like free will, provided it is understood in a multiverse context. The same example exonerates Everett’s theory itself. On the face of it, the price of understanding interference phenomena is to create or exacerbate many philosophical problems. But here, and in many other examples I have given in this book, we see that the very opposite is the case. The fruitfulness of the multiverse theory in contributing to the solution of long-standing philosophical problems is so great that it would be worth adopting even if there were no physical evidence for it at all. Indeed, the philosopher David Lewis, in his book *On the Plurality of Worlds,* has postulated the existence of a multiverse for philosophical reasons alone.
[Image: 035]
**TABLE 13.1** *Physical representations of some statements referring to free will.*
 
Turning again to the theory of evolution, I can similarly attribute some sense to those who criticize Darwinian evolution on the grounds that it seems ‘unlikely’ that such complex adaptations could have evolved in the given time. One of Dawkins’ critics wants us to be as surprised by the biosphere as we would be if a heap of spare parts thrown together happened to fall into the pattern of a Boeing 747. On the face of it, this critic is forcing an analogy between, on the one hand, billions of years of planet-wide trial and error, and on the other hand an instantaneous accident of ‘happening to fall together’. That would be wilfully to miss the whole point of the evolutionary explanation. Nevertheless, is Dawkins’ precisely opposite position completely adequate as an explanation ? Dawkins wants us *not to be surprised* that complex adaptations have come into being spontaneously. In other words, he is claiming that his ‘selfish gene’ theory is a full explanation — not of course for specific adaptations, but of how it was possible for such complex adaptations to come into being.
But it is not a full explanation. There is an explanatory gap, and this time we already know much more about how the other strands could fill it. We have seen that the very fact that physical variables can store information, that they can interact with one another to transfer and replicate it, and that such processes are stable, all depend on the details of quantum theory. Furthermore, we have seen that the existence of highly adapted replicators depends on the physical feasibility of virtual-reality generation and universality, which in turn can be understood as consequences of a deep principle, the Turing principle, that links physics and the theory of computation and makes no explicit reference to replicators, evolution or biology at all.
An analogous gap exists in Popperian epistemology. Its critics wonder why the scientific method works, or what justifies our reliance on the best scientific theories. This leads them to hanker after a principle of induction or something of the sort (though, as  crypto-inductivists, they usually realize that such a principle would not explain or justify anything either). For Popperians to reply that there is no such thing as justification, or that it is never rational to rely on theories, is to provide no explanation. Popper even said that ‘no theory of knowledge should attempt to explain why we are successful in our attempts to explain things’ (*Objective Knowledge* p. 23). But, once we understand that the growth of human knowledge is a physical process, we see that it cannot be illegitimate to try to explain how and why it occurs. Epistemology is a theory of (emergent) physics. It is a factual theory about the circumstances under which a certain physical quantity (knowledge) will or will not grow. The bare assertions of this theory are largely accepted. But we cannot possibly find an explanation of why they are true solely within the theory of knowledge *per se*. In that narrow sense, Popper was right. The explanation must involve quantum physics, the Turing principle and, as Popper himself stressed, the theory of evolution.
The proponents of the prevailing theory, in each of the four cases, are put permanently on the defensive by their critics’ harping on these explanatory gaps. This often forces them to retreat into the core of their own strand. ‘Here I stand, I can do no other’ is their ultimate response, as they rely on the self-evident irrationality of abandoning the unrivalled fundamental theory of their own particular field. This only makes them seem even more narrow to the critics, and it tends to engender pessimism about the very prospect of further fundamental explanation.
Despite all the excuses I have been making for the critics of the central theories, the history of all four strands shows that something very unpleasant happened to fundamental science and philosophy for most of the twentieth century. The popularity of positivism and of an instrumentalist view of science was connected with an apathy, loss of self-confidence and pessimism about genuine explanations at a time when the prestige, usefulness and, indeed, funding for fundamental research were all at an all-time high. Of course there were many individual exceptions, including the four heroes of this chapter. But the unprecedented manner in which their  theories were simultaneously adopted and ignored speaks for itself. I do not claim to have a full explanation for this phenomenon, but whatever caused it, we seem to be coming out of it now.
I have pointed out one possible contributory cause, namely that individually, all four theories have explanatory gaps that can make them seem narrow, inhuman and pessimistic. But I suggest that when they are taken together as a unified explanation of the fabric of reality, this unfortunate property is reversed. Far from denying free will, far from placing human values in a context where they are trivial and insignificant, far from being pessimistic, it is a fundamentally optimistic world-view that places human minds at the centre of the physical universe, and explanation and understanding at the centre of human purposes. I hope we shall not have to spend too long looking backwards to defend this unified view against non-existent competitors. There will be no lack of competitors when, having taken the unified theory of the fabric of reality seriously, we begin to develop it further. It is time to move on.
